Rules & Regulations For
M.S. by Research Programs












Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

There has been an increasing need to embed innovation components in various academic programs. Traditionally, research-based academic programs emphasize on scholarly publications. However, it is also important to recognize other forms of contributions, i.e. patents, technology development, entrepreneurship, etc., as outcomes of research initiatives. In view of this, the Institute has started MS by Research programs in cross-disciplinary, multi-disciplinary as well as application-directed areas. The research problems increasingly require a multidisciplinary approach to solve complex problems of interest or propose solutions leading to new innovations and entrepreneurship ventures. Today, we need in many cases diverse disciplines to engage in a spectrum of research-based activities ranging from scientific to social issues that challenge contemporary society- establishing a consistency between diverse academic spaces. A considerable demand exists for such professionals who can synthesize more than one discipline and create teams of academicians and scholars that enrich the overall educational and research experience.

M.S. by Research Programs are expected to be designed for:

i) Innovative Research Outcomes in cross-disciplinary / multi-disciplinary areas. Such Programs are expected to be offered by schools or centres synergising diverse academic disciplines; admission will be through the academic unit specified admission process.

ii) Innovation Driven Outcomes leading to EIR’s and / or Start-Up’s; admission will be through the academic unit specified admission process.

iii) Targeted Deliveries linked to projects sponsored by external agencies. Only project fellows appointed in a delivery-oriented project can register in part-time mode through a DRC/SRC/CRC monitored selection process.
iv) The regular M.S. by Research students can be in the Centres and CoE only. The Department can admit
M.S. by Research students supported by the R&D project. Only one (01) M.S. by Research student can be allocated to a faculty.

1. Limits on Registration
A M.S. by Research student can register for maximum and minimum number of credits in a semester as indicated in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1 Maximum and Minimum Credits a M.S. by Research student can register for during the Regular semester
M.S. by Research student registered under
different categoriesIndicative	Maximum
CreditsMinimum CreditsFull-time Regular166Part-Time123
1.1. Registration Kept Alive (RKA)
A student admitted to an M.S. by Research program who has at least completed minimum credit requirement of the first semester, can keep his studentship alive while he is pursuing any professional activity, by opting for RKA in subsequent semesters. The candidate must indicate his intent of RKA before the last date of late registration through DRC to Dean(academic). The candidate has to pay appropriate registration fees for RKA status (similar to M.Tech. students). A student can maintain RKA status for a maximum of 6 semesters.
1.2 Change of Registration from M.S. by Research Programme to Ph.D. Programme
The M.S. by Research Degree can be upgraded to Ph.D. based on the CGPA (>7.5) and progress of the student after 3 Semesters for regular students; however, transition will require continuation of the same work and the student has to satisfy regular PhD requirements. All conditions of Ph.D. degree program will be applicable to all such students. All such changes of registration shall be reported to the Senate.

1.3 Maximum Duration of a Program
A full-time M.S. by Research student can complete the program between 2 years (minimum) to 4 years (maximum). A part-time student can complete the program between 3 years (minimum) to 5 years (maximum)

2 ACADEMIC REQUIREMENTS
2.1 Academic Load & Calculation of Credits for a Course for PG Programs
The total credits for a course is calculated by taking into account the number of lectures, tutorial, and practical hours (L-T-P) assigned as given in Table 2.1. Each credit is associated with the number of contact hours and the expected number of self-learning hours (on an average) to be spent by the student for each contact hour to meet academic demand of the course.
Table 2.1 LTP-structure and credit assignment for M.S. by research
TypeL-T-PDistribution of contact and beyond contact Hours#Total Credits (TC=TH/4)Contact Hours (CH)Beyond Contact Hours (BCH)Total
Hours (TH)1 hour of Lecture1-0-013411 hour of Tutorial0-1-013411 hour of Lab0-0-11120.51 hour of Thesis/Project0-0-11341#Contact hour for a project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc.

2.2. Academic Credit Requirements for M.S. by Research Students
A student enrolled in the M.S. Program will require to complete 24 credits through course work, including the 4 NG credits, and 36 credits through research; The coursework credits may include elective courses- suggested by the School/Centers/SRC- and a presentation towards the assigned/defined research problem;

2.3 Academic Performance Requirements
2.3.1 Minimum performance for continuation and Graduation in a program
The minimum CGPA requirement for continuation and graduation in a program is given below in Table 2.2. Table 2.2 Minimum CGPA requirements




2.4 Degree Grade Point Average (DGPA) for M.S. by Research students
A M.S. by Research student who has completed the credit requirements for the course work but has a CGPA less than 7.5 (required for graduation) will be evaluated using Degree Grade Point Average (DGPA) where DGPA is defined with respect to the best performance of the student in minimum number of credits.
2.5 Minimum performance for continuation of Assistantship/Fellowship
The minimum CGPA requirement for continuation Assistantship/Fellowship is given in Table 2.3
Table 2.3 Minimum CGPA requirements for Continuation of Assistantship/Fellowship
Sr. No.ProgramContinuation of Assistantship/
Fellowship1M.S. by Research6.5
3. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
       Financial assistantship/scholarship will be provided to the eligible students admitted under regular full-time program. The regular M.S. by Research students would get fellowship/assistantship up to a maximum of 2 years as JRF starting from the date of registration. In exceptional cases, the fellowship can be extended to a maximum of one more year depending on the work done and the recommendations of the supervisor and SRC.
4. LEAVE RULES
Leave rules for M.S. by Research will be followed as per the approved Rules and regulation for Ph.D. students enrolled from July 2022 onwards.

5. RULES AND REGULATION FOR CONDUCT AND EVALUATION OF M.S. project/thesis

a) Allotment of students to supervisors will be made on the preferences of the students and supervisor(s).
b) The supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the first semester.
c) Head or CRC would advise the student until the student is assigned to a regular supervisor(s)
d) The SRC will normally consist of supervisor(s) and three other faculty members conversant with the field of research with at least one-member external to the center (may be outside the Institute also).
e) A Student Research Committee (SRC) for the candidate shall be proposed by the supervisor(s), recommended by the CRC and approved by Dean (Academics).
f) The SRC shall have one member identified as Chairman for administrative functions and the supervisor(s) will act as convener. Chairman, SRC is to be appointed by Dean (Academics).
g) The appointment of SRC should be completed by the end of the first semester.
h) Any subsequent changes in the composition of SRC shall be communicated through the CRC to Dean (Academics) for record.
i) The SRC and supervisor(s) shall be the internal examiners for the evaluation of the thesis.
j) The SRC is expected to monitor the progress of the candidate until the completion of the program.
k) More than one student may be allowed to work on a problem of multi-disciplinary nature with a clear justification and problem statement describing the roles and responsibilities of the students
l) The quality of the work can be assessed in terms of publications / patents / innovations / technology transfers / start-ups at the end of the project;

m) The Project / Thesis will be required to be evaluated by one examiner outside the Institute from the list of examiners proposed by the SRC and the SRC.


6. GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS
A student is deemed to have completed the requirements for graduation, if she/he has met the requirements laid down in Clauses 6.1 to 6.4 below.

6.1 Minimum Residential Requirement Table 6.1 Minimum residential requirement









6.2 Academic

The student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she/he has earned the minimum credits as per Section 2.2, while meeting the minimum CGPA requirements as mentioned in Section 2.3.
6.3 No Dues Clearance

Degree will be awarded after obtaining No Dues Clearance from all concerned sections as deemed necessary by Dean (Academics).
17.4 No case of Disciplinary Action

The student shall not be considered to have completed the Academic Requirements if there is any case of indiscipline pending against her/him.



6.5 Award of Degrees

6.5.1 Provisional Certificate

A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 6.1 to 6.4, can be provided a provisional certificate by the office of Dean (Academics) on the approval of Chairman, Senate.
6.5.2 Degree Certificate

A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 6.1 to 6.4, is recommended by the Senate to the Board of Governors (BOG) for the award of the appropriate degree in the ensuing convocation. The degree can be awarded only after the BOG accords its approval.
6.6 Withdrawal of Degree

Under extremely exceptional circumstances, where gross violation of the graduation requirements is detected at a later stage, the Senate may recommend to the Board of Governors for withdrawal of a degree already awarded to the student.
7. AMENDMENTS

Notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the Senate of IIT Jodhpur reserves the right to modify/amend, without notice, Rules and Regulations of the Postgraduate programmes at IIT-Jodhpur.


