M.Tech and M.Tech-Ph.D dual degree programs
in Computer Science and Engineering
Introduction:
Traditionally Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) teaching were focusing on two major areas,
i.e., theories and systems (database, computer hardware, and operating systems). With the advent of
the era of Cloud Computing, Edge Computing, AI and Big Data, the discipline is being transformed
by incorporation of new emerging technologies. It is becoming an instrumental tool in solving major
problems faced by modern society such as energy, natural disasters, pollution, and water. Through
this newly revamped M.Tech and M.Tech-Ph.D dual degree programs in CSE, IIT Jodhpur is making
a conscious effort to divulge from the traditional path and planning to reposition itself to become a
leading institute in this new genre of Computer Science education.
Objectives:
This M.Tech and M.Tech-Ph.D dual degree programs in CSE will offer students with deep
knowledge of core and applied computer science. Through this programme, a student will learn niche
subject areas which are of paramount importance in the modern big data era, such as Computer
Systems and Security. This programme is aiming at imparting the necessary breadth and depth to the
students for pursuing careers in academics as well as in industry. This programme is aiming at
extending undergraduate computing skills with up-to-date and in-depth expertise in specialized areas
of Computer Systems and Security.
Expected Graduate Attributes:
After completing this programme, a student will be able to develop an ability to:
1. Understand fundamental concepts and hands-on knowledge of emerging fields in Computer
Science.
2. Conceive, Design and Develop state-of-the-art scalable parallel and distributed systems
3. Solve Big data problems through the knowledge of advanced data structures, distributed
algorithmic design, analysis, and applications.
4. Design and develop network protocols for Wireless, Sensor, Mobile, and Vehicular networks.
5. Ideate, Implement and Integrate cryptographic, fault tolerant algorithms for large scale
distributed systems
6. Understand state-of-the-art hardware platforms for running compute intensive distributed
algorithms
7. Ability to understand and apply evolving ethics and privacy laws across various domains and
territories.
8. Plan and manage technical projects
Learning Outcome:
1. Understand the fundamentals of algorithmic complexity, advanced computer architecture,
advanced network, and security protocols.
2. Apply appropriate design principles, framework and protocols to develop dependable
systems.
3. Demonstrate hands-on knowledge of cutting edge simulation, synthesizing, programming
tools.
4. Ability to design and develop system architecture for mobile, cloud, fog, and edge
computing.
5. Demonstrate hands-on knowledge of virtualization, data center design and management, and
software defined networking.
6. Skills to comprehend and communicate effectively.
7. Apply appropriate project and business management principles and tools for real-world
problems.

Title Software and Data Engineering Number CSL7XX0
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. Type Compulsory
Prerequisite
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Discuss techniques to manage a large amount of data
2. Provide mechanisms to design and develop data-intensive computing systems
Learning Outcomes
 The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Design complex end-to-end data pipeline for data processing
2. Critically identify and use the tools for data handling and management
3. Use modern software technologies to design and develop data analytical systems
Contents
CSL7XX0 Cloud Computing and Virtualization 1-0-0 [1]
Basics of complex software design: Concept of modular software, microservices,
communication, 4+1 architectural views and patterns (5 lectures)
Cloud Computing: Architecture of cluster computing, design of data centers, open data center
platforms, fault-tolerant system design (5 lectures)
Virtualization: Type-1 and Type-2 virtualization, virtual machine, containers, dockers (4
lectures)
CSL7XX0 Data Management 1-0-0 [1]
Data Management: Structured data, relational database management, unstructured data,
semi-structured data, Nosql database management (mongodb), column database, graph
database, XML, JSON, HDFS, Handling drift in data, sensor data reliability at software and
algorithmic level, sensor data analysis techniques (14 lectures)
CSL7XX0 Data Intensive Processing Systems 1-0-0 [1]
Data Intensive Processing Systems: Architecture of large scale data processing systems,
Hadoop, Apache Spark, Storm, parallel data processing concepts such as map-reduce, directed
acyclic graph, resilient distributed datasets, dynamic resource allocation, partial & shared
computation, storage architecture (14 lectures)
Textbook
1. Bass L., Clements P., Kazman R., (2012), Software Architecture in Practice, 3rd edition,
Addison-Wesley Professional
2. Martin K., (2017), Designing Data-Intensive Applications: The Big Ideas Behind Reliable,
Scalable, and Maintainable Systems, 1st Edition, O'Reilly Media
Self Learning Material
1. Tylor,R.N., Medvidovic,N. and Dashofy,E.M., (2014), Software Architecture Foundation:
Theory and Practice, Wiley
Preparatory Course Material
1. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering
2. International Conference on Data Engineering 

Title Computer Architecture Number CSL7XX0
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. 2nd Year Type Compulsory
Prerequisite Computer Organization
Objectives
The Instructor will:
1. Provide background to understand various components of a modern computer system,
 its interconnections, and performance issue
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Explain the working principles of various components of modern computer systems
2. Compare between systems using benchmark data
3. Write, execute and debug parallel programs on GPU
Contents
CSL7XX0 Multi System Architecture 1-0-0 [1]
Introduction: Defining Computer Architecture, Flynn’s Classification of Computers, Metrics for
Performance Measurement. (4 lectures)
Memory Hierarchy: Introduction, Advanced Optimizations of Cache Performance, Memory
Technology and Optimizations, Virtual Memory and Virtual Machines, The Design of Memory
Hierarchies, Introduction to Pin Instrumentation and Cache grind, Case Study: Intel Core i7
(10 lectures)
CSL7XX0 Multicore Processing 1-0-0 [1]
Instruction-Level Parallelism: Instruction-level Parallelism: Concepts and
Challenges, Basic Compiler Techniques for Exposing ILP, Reducing Branch Costs with
Advanced Branch Prediction, Dynamic Scheduling, Superscalar, Limitations of ILP, Case
Study: Dynamic Scheduling in Intel Core i7. (9 lectures)
Multicore Processor: Introduction, CPU Interconnections, Network on Chip (NoC), Routing
Protocols, Quality of Service on NoC. (5 lectures)
CSL7XX0 Fundamentals of Parallel Programming 1-0-0 [1]
Data Level Parallelism: Introduction, Vector Architecture, SIMD Instruction Set Extensions for
Multimedia, Graphics Processing Units, GPU Memory Hierarchy, Detecting and Enhancing
Loop- Level Parallelism, CUDA Programming, Case Study: Nvidia Maxwell. (14 lectures)
Textbook
1. 1. Hennessy,J.L. and Patterson,D.A., (2012), Computer Architecture: A Quantitative
Approach, 5th Edition, Morgan Kauffmann Publishers
2. 2. Shen,J.P. and Lipasti,M.H., (2005), Modern Processor Design: Fundamentals of Superscalar
Processors, McGraw-Hill Publishers
Self-Learning Material
1. 1. CUDA: https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-zone
3. 2. OpenMP: https://www.openmp.org/

Preparatory Course Material
1. Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras,
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106134/

M.Tech in Artificial Intelligence (AI)
Introduction:
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a branch of computer science that aims to create machines to act with higher
levels of intelligence and emulate the human capabilities of sense, comprehend and act. The core problems of
artificial intelligence include programming computers for certain traits such as Knowledge, Reasoning,
Problem-solving, Perception, Learning and Planning. AI technology development and applications are
evolving rapidly with major implications for economies and societies. As the demand for such applications
increases, there is also an increasing need for building the future workforce for AI. For developing the AI
ecosystem, this program will be executed in synergy with other M.Tech programs running in IIT Jodhpur,
such as Sensors & IoT, Cyber-Physical Systems, and Advanced Manufacturing and Design.
Objectives:
This M.Tech in AI programme will offer students with deep knowledge of both fundamental AI technologies,
as well as application-oriented AI. A student completing this program will be capable to undertake careers in
industry as well as academia. He/She will have the option to explore a variety of domains including
Manufacturing, Fintech, Healthcare, Agriculture/Food Processing, Education, Retail/Customer Engagement,
Human and Robot interaction/intelligent automation, Smart City , Aid for Differently Abled/Accessibility
Technology.
Expected Graduate Attributes:
After completing this programme, a student will be able to develop an ability to:
1. Comprehend fundamental concepts and hands-on knowledge of the state-of-the-art AI methodologies.
2. Design and Build real-world AI systems for complex planning, decision making and learning, solving
application-specific problems, and to reason about them.
3. Conceive, Design and Develop Intelligent multi-modal multi-sensory Man-Machine interfaces.
4. Design, Develop and Deploy machine learning based applications using structured and unstructured
data (e.g., speech, text, images/videos).
5. Understand and Assess reliability, dependability and trust-worthiness of AI-based systems.
6. Design and develop AI applications for resource constrained environments.
7. Adhere to evolving ethics and privacy laws across various domains and territories.
8. Plan and manage technical projects.
Learning Outcome:
1. Understand the fundamentals of Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Inference Engines, Speech,
Vision, Natural Language Understanding, Robotics, and Human Computer Interaction.
2. Unify the knowledge of human cognition, AI, Machine Learning and data engineering for
designing systems.
3. Demonstrate hands-on knowledge of state-of-the-art AI tools for real-world problem-solving.
4. Ability to develop real-time and robust AI-based systems with specific software, hardware and data
requirements.
5. Build solutions to explore fully immersive computer-generated worlds (in VR), and overlay computer
graphics onto our view of our immediate environment (AR) along with smart, cognitive functionality.
6. Demonstrate advanced skills to comprehend and communicate effectively.
7. Carry out projects using intelligent cognitive solutions provided by AI algorithms to get more insights
in stakeholder management, risk modeling, intelligent resource scheduling and managing project
constraints with intelligent use of data models.

Title Artificial Intelligence I Number CSL7XX0
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory
Prerequisite None
Objectives
 The Instructor will:
1. Cover various paradigms that come under the broad umbrella of AI.
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Develop an understanding of where and how AI can be used.
Contents
Introduction (1 lecture)
Propositional logic (8 lectures)
Search: Uninformed strategies (BFS, DFS, Dijkstra), Informed strategies (A* search, heuristic
functions, hill-climbing), Adversarial search (Minimax algorithm, Alpha-beta pruning) (10
lectures)
Predicate logic: Knowledge representation, Resolution (6 lectures)
Rule-based systems: Natural language parsing, Context free grammar (3 lectures)
Constraint satisfaction problems (4 lectures)
Planning: State space search, Planning Graphs, Partial order planning (4 lectures)
Uncertain Reasoning: Probabilistic reasoning, Bayesian Networks, Dempster-Shafer theory,
Fuzzy logic (6 lectures)
Textbook
1.Russel,S., and Norvig,P., (2015), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd Edition,
 Prentice Hall
Reference Books
1. Research literature
Self Learning Material
1. Department of Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley,
 http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLD52D2B739E4D1C5F
2. NPTEL: Artificial Intelligence, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105077/

Title Machine Learning-1 Number CSL7XX0
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory
Prerequisite None
Objectives
 The Instructor will:
1. Provide motivation and understanding of the need and importance of Machine Learning
in today’s world
2. Provide details about various algorithms in Machine Learning
Learning Outcomes
The students are expected to have the ability to:
1. Develop a sense of Machine Learning in the modern context, and independently work
on problems relating to Machine Learning
2. Design and program efficient algorithms related to Machine Learning, train models,
conduct experiments, and deliver ML-based applications
Contents
CSL7XX1: Introduction to Machine Learning: Supervised Learning 1-0-0[1]
Introduction: Motivation, Different types of learning, Linear regression, Logistic regression (2
lectures)
Gradient Descent: Introduction, Stochastic Gradient Descent, Subgradients, Stochastic
Gradient Descent for risk minimization (2 lectures)
Support Vector Machines: Hard SVM, Soft SVM, Optimality conditions, Duality, Kernel trick,
Implementing Soft SVM with Kernels (4 lectures)
Decision Trees: Decision Tree algorithms, Random forests (2 lectures)
Neural Networks: Feedforward neural networks, Expressive power of neural networks, SGD
and Backpropagation (3 lectures)
Model selection and validation: Validation for model selection, k-fold cross-validation, TrainingValidation-Testing split, Regularized loss minimization (1 lectures)
CSL7XX2: Introduction to Machine Learning: Unsupervised Learning and Generative
Models 1-0-0[1]
Nearest Neighbour: k-nearest neighbour, Curse of dimensionality (1 lecture)
Clustering: Linkage-based clustering algorithms, k-means algorithm, Spectral clustering (3
lectures)
Dimensionality reduction: Principal Component Analysis, Random projections, Compressed
sensing (2 lectures)
Generative Models: Maximum likelihood estimator, Naive Bayes, Linear Discriminant Analysis,
Latent variables and Expectation-maximization algorithm, Bayesian learning (5 lectures)
Feature Selection and Generation: Feature selection, Feature transformations, Feature learning
(3 lectures)
CSL7XX3: Introduction to Machine Learning: Computational Learning Theory and
Deep Learning 1-0-0[1]
Statistical Learning Framework: PAC learning, Agnostic PAC learning, Bias-complexity tradeoff,
No free lunch theorem, VC dimension, Structural risk minimization, Adaboost (7 lectures)
Foundations of Deep Learning: DNN, CNN, RNN, Autoencoders (7 lectures)
Textbook
1. Shalev-Shwartz,S., Ben-David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From
Theory to Algorithms, Cambridge University Press
Reference Books
1. Mitchell Tom (1997). Machine Learning, Tata McGraw-Hill
Self Learning Material
1. Department of Computer Science, Stanford University,
 https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 

1. Introduction
Traditional curriculum in Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) has focused on two major areas, i.e., theory
and systems (database, computer hardware, and operating systems). With the advent of the era of Edge
Computing, Cloud Computing, Security, AI and Big Data, the discipline is being transformed by the
incorporation of new emerging technologies. The discipline is becoming instrumental in solving major real-world
problems faced by modern society such as healthcare, security, sustainability, and socio-economic challenges.
There is a need to revamp the B.Tech program in CSE so as to prepare students to tackle problems which are
fundamentally multidisciplinary in nature. This would improve IIT Jodhpur’s participation and contribution
towards providing solutions for global challenges. IIT Jodhpur can become a leading source of technology
solutions for self-reliant India.
2. Objectives of the Program
The objective of the B.Tech. program in Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) at IIT Jodhpur is to equip
students to undertake careers involving challenges of working on real-world problems, while innovating with
their core competency in computer science. The curriculum gives due importance to the foundational aspects of
computer science, as well as develops in students the necessary engineering skills for addressing emerging
technological challenges. The program offers flexibility in choosing elective courses for widening the
understanding of emerging concepts and processes in different domains. Students can opt for specializations
which provide a coherent and increasingly sophisticated understanding so as to enable them to pursue preferred
career opportunities. The program will produce a well prepared and well-motivated workforce to undertake
careers in research and industry involving innovation, knowledge creation, engineering, and entrepreneurship.
3. Expected Graduate Attributes
After completing this program, a student will be able to develop an ability to:
1. Apply appropriate knowledge in Computer Science and Engineering to identify, formulate, analyze, and solve
complex engineering problems in order to reach substantive conclusions.
2. Self-learn and engage in use of advanced computing tools.
3. Develop sustainable computing solutions in broader economic, societal and environmental contexts.
4. Think critically, creatively and analytically as a computer scientist, whilst being able to work effectively,
independently and collaboratively as part of a team in research, technology development and entrepreneurial
ventures.
5. Apply evolving ethics and privacy laws across various domains and territories.
6. Effectively communicate engineering concepts and ideas to peers in written or oral forms.
7. Be motivated to engage in independent and life-long learning in the broadest context of evolving technological
challenges.
4. Learning Outcomes
The student will have the ability to:
1. Abstract out computational models based on mathematical rigor.
2. Critically analyse and appreciate emerging and applied fields of computer science owing to deeper
understanding and strong foundations in theoretical computer science.
3. Develop robust, secure, and efficient software systems that would involve software engineering, data
structures, and algorithm design paradigms.
4. Apply different concepts including digital design, computer architecture, operating systems, databases,
networking, and applications for building solutions for real-world problems.
5. Design and implement smart, intelligent, and user friendly interfaces for computer applications.
6. Analyse, design, develop and deploy computer based systems in collaboration with domain experts for
meeting societal needs in areas such as healthcare, safety, environment, law enforcement, transportation, etc.,
by exploiting tools and techniques of Big data, AI and project management.
7. Become proficient in some of the specialized areas such as Computer Vision, Augmented Reality, Internet of
Things, Natural Language Understanding, and Intelligent Communication.
8. Communicate effectively by comprehending, documenting, making effective presentations and exchanging
clear instructions.
5. New Skill Sets Targeted
1. Designing user-centric human-machine interfaces
2. Designing end-to-end socio-digital reality systems
3. Developing sustainable computing solutions
4. Building secure, intelligent, and trustable systems
5. Designing and synthesizing digital systems for solving industrial problems

Course Title Maths for Computing Course No. CSLXXX
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-1-0 [4]
Offered for B.Tech CSE, AIDE Type Core
Prerequisite None
Objectives
1. To learn about languages, grammars, and computation models
2. To learn about computability
3. To learn basics of parsing techniques
Learning Outcomes:
1. The students are expected to have the ability to:
2. Model computer science problems using discrete mathematical structures
3. Distinguish between computable and incomputable problems
4. Develop understanding of properties of languages and design parsers
Contents
Discrete Structures: Can computers solve every problem? The limits of computing, Set theory, Relations and
functions, Propositional logic, First-order logic, Counting techniques. (12 Lectures)
Proof techniques: Constructive, Contraposition, Contradiction; Mathematical Induction (5 Lectures)
Graph Theory: Properties of graphs, Graph matching and coloring. (6 Lectures)
Automata Theory: DFAs, NFAs, Equivalence of DFAs and NFAs, Closure properties of regular languages,
Regular expressions, Equivalence of regular expressions and NFAs, Nonregular languages, Context-Free
Grammars, Context-Free Languages. (10 Lectures)
Turing Machine: Introduction, Designing Turing machines, The Universal Turing machine. (5 Lectures)
Parsing Techniques: LR, LALR, Shift-Reduce parsers. (4 Lectures)
Text Books
1. M. SIPSER (2014), Introduction to the Theory of Computation, Cengage Learning, 3rd Edition.
2. K.H. ROSEN (2018), Discrete Mathematics and its Applications, McGraw-Hill, 2018, 8th Edition.
References
1. J.E. HOPCROFT, R. MOTWANI, J.D. ULLMAN (2008), Pearson, Introduction to Automata Theory,
Languages, and Computation, 3rd Edition.
2. R. JOHNSONBAUGH (2017), Discrete Mathematics, Prentice Hall, 8th Edition.
Self-learning material
1. Stanford CS103: http://web.stanford.edu/class/cs103/

Course Title Design and Analysis of Algorithms Course No. CSLxxx
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-1-0 [4]
Offered for B.Tech CSE, AIDE Type Compulsory
Prerequisite Data Structures and Algorithms
Objectives
1. To introduce and implement various techniques for designing algorithms and advanced data structures.
2. To learn space and time complexity analysis of algorithms.
Learning Outcomes
1. Ability to choose and implement appropriate algorithm design techniques for solving problems.
2. Understand how the choice of data structures and algorithm design methods impact the performance of
programs.
3. Ability to analyze the worst-case and average-case behaviour of algorithms in terms of time and memory
requirements.
Contents
Reasoning About Algorithms: P, NP, NP-completeness, Reductions, Complexity analysis. (5 lectures)
Graph Algorithms: Strongly-connected components, Kosaraju’s algorithm 1 and 2, Applications. (4 lectures)
Greedy Techniques: Local versus Global optimality, Interval scheduling, Exchange arguments. (5 lectures)
Divide-and-Conquer: Optimality, Recursive algorithms, Divide-and-Conquer recurrences, The Master
Theorem and applications, Non-uniform recurrences. (6 lectures)
Dynamic Programming: Reusing sub-computations (Sequence alignment, Bellman-Ford algorithm),
Precomputing (Floyd-Warshall algorithm, Johnson’s algorithm), Combinatorial problems. (Knapsack) (6
lectures)
Linear Programming: Canonical and standard forms, Feasibility and optimization, Simplex algorithm. (5
lectures)
Approximation Algorithms: Relative approximations, PAS and FPAS scheduling. (4 lectures)
Randomized Algorithms: Random guess (Quick select), Random guess with high confidence (Karger’s min-cut
algorithm), Storing associative data (Hashing), Error bounds. (7 lectures)
Text Book
1. T. H. CORMEN, C. E. LEISERSON, R.L. RIVEST, C. STEIN (2009), Introduction to Algorithms, MIT Press, 3rd
Edition.
Reference Book
1. J. KLEINBERG, E. TARDOS (2005), Algorithm Design, Pearson Education, 1st Edition.

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
B.Tech. AI & DS Curriculum Structure AY 2020-21 
1. Introduction  
This BTech program combines two broad areas, Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, while building a 
strong foundation in Computer Science. Artificial Intelligence (AI) aims to create machines to act with higher 
levels of intelligence and emulate the human capabilities of sense, comprehend and act. On the other hand, 
Data Science (DS) is the art of generating insight, knowledge and predictions by processing data pertaining 
to a system or a process. AI and Data Science can feed into each other as evolutionary systems that can 
continuously learn from data and thereby emulate humans better. As the demand for these areas increases, 
there is also an increasing need for building the future workforce for Artificial Intelligence and Data Science. 
IIT Jodhpur will offer this unique program to develop the Artificial Intelligence and Data Science ecosystem in 
the country. The curriculum includes courses in computer science, mathematics, artificial intelligence, 
machine learning, and their applications in various domains. The curriculum also provides opportunities to 
the students to explore specialization areas including visual computing, socio-digital realities, robotics, and 
AIOT. The program also allows the students to venture into Management specialization with AI and 
Technology focus, leading to MBA (BTech + MBA dual degree program), as well as entrepreneurial activities. 
The program also enables the students to build strong industry linkages in terms of practical training program, 
summer internships, and co-supervision on projects. 

 
2. Objectives of the program 

 
1. BTech in AI&DS will offer students with in-depth knowledge of fundamental concepts, as well as 

application- oriented technologies in the broad areas of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science. 
2. A student completing this program will be capable of undertaking careers in industry as well as 

academia. Interested students may also follow entrepreneurial endeavors in AI&DS areas. 
3. He/She will have the option to explore a variety of domains including governance, finance, security, 

transportation, healthcare, energy management, agriculture/food processing, population studies, legal 
systems, content creation and management systems, weather prediction, economics, predictive 
maintenance, smart manufacturing, education, human and robot interaction/intelligent automation, 
smart city, drug discovery, and aid for differently abled/accessibility technology. 

 
3. Expected Graduate Attributes 

 
After completing this program, a student will develop an ability to: 
1. Comprehend fundamental concepts and hands-on knowledge of the state-of-the-art AI&DS 

methodologies. 
2. Skill set to clean, process, analyze, manage and handle security and privacy aspects of structured and 

unstructured data. 
3. Ability to identify, design and apply appropriate pattern recognition and data mining methods for 

generating relevant insight from data. 
4. Design and build real-world AI&DS systems, solving application-specific problems, and to reason about 

them. 
5. Conceive, design and develop Intelligent multi-modal multi-sensory Man-Machine interfaces. 
6. Design, develop, and deploy machine learning based applications using structured and unstructured data 

(e.g., speech, text, images/videos). 
7. Capability to follow a unique interdisciplinary approach for solving problems, using knowledge of 

mathematics, statistics, computing and one or more selected domains among physics, chemistry, biology, 
engineering sciences, and management. 

8. Understand and assess reliability, dependability and trust-worthiness of AI&DS based systems and their 
impact on societal and environmental context. 

9. Design and develop AI applications for resource constrained environments. 
10. Adhere to evolving ethics and privacy laws across various domains and territories. 
11. Plan and manage technical projects. 

 
4. Learning Outcomes 

 
The student will have an ability to 
1. Apply the knowledge of mathematics, science, engineering fundamentals along with artificial intelligence 

and machine learning knowledge, and an engineering specialization to develop solutions to real-world 
problems. 

2. Apply appropriate theories, design principles, frameworks, and protocols to develop AI & DS based 
system prototypes. 

 1 



3. Demonstrate hands-on knowledge of modern simulation, and AI & DS programming tools with an 
understanding of the limitations. 

4. Apply to reason informed by the contextual knowledge to assess societal, health, safety, legal and cultural 
issues and the consequent responsibilities relevant to the professional engineering practice. 

5. Function effectively as an individual, and as a member or leader in diverse teams, and in 
multidisciplinary settings. 

6. Communicate effectively on complex engineering activities by comprehending and writing effective 
reports and design documentation, making effective presentations and exchanging clear instructions. 

7. Apply appropriate project and business management principles and tools for real-world problems. 
8. Recognize the need for, and have the preparation and ability to engage in independent and life-long 

learning in the broadest context of technological change. 
 

5. New skill sets targeted 
 

1. AI&DS algorithms for transforming large data into actionable decision 
2. Building end to end systems for enhancing human capabilities using vision, language, and text processing 
3. Foundations in ML Optimization 
4. Ethical, Safe, and Dependable AI/ML Systems 
5. Familiarity with emerging and futuristic AI&DS techniques 
6. Entrepreneurial capability 
7. Written and oral communication 

 2 



6. Topic clouds and Mapping of Topic clouds with proposed courses 
Map topics with courses in the table given below: 

 
Table 1. Topics and Mapping of Topic with Courses 
Area Topics Category Course (IE/IS/PC/PE) 

(Core/ 
Techniques 
Technology/ 
Systems) 

 Abstract Data Types, Linear Data Structures, Non Core Data Structures and 
AI and ML Linear Data Structures, Stack, Queue, Link List, Heap, Algorithms (PC) 

Sorting, Hashing, Algorithm Analysis, Graph, Tree 
Discrete Structures, Logics, Set, Graph and Trees, Core Maths for Computing (PC) 
Deterministic Finite Automata, Non-deterministic Finite 
Automata, PushDown Automata, Context Free 
Grammar, Turing Machine, Lexical and Syntax 
Analysis, Parsing 

Hardware-Software interaction, Digital circuit design Core Principles of Computer 
and analysis, Computer system design, Instruction set Systems - 1 (PC) 
architecture, Language translation, Semantic analysis 

Network-OS interaction, Process management, Storage Core Principles of Computer 
management, Systems - 2 (PC) 

Complexity Analysis, Divide-and-conquer, Greedy Core Design and Analysis of 
Algorithms, Dynamic Programming, Linear Algorithms (PC) 
Programming, Universal Hashing, Max-flow Min-cut, 
Amortized Analysis, Traveling Salesman Problem, 
Approximation Algorithms 

Bayes Decision Theory, Regression, Bias variance, Core and Pattern Recognition and 
Maximum Likelihood Estimation, Bayesian Parameter Technique Machine Learning (IE) 
Estimation, Decision Tree, Random Forest, Artificial 
Neural Network, Clustering, k-means, SVM, Feature 
Selection, Dimensionality Reduction 
Uninformed Search Strategies, Informed Search Technique Artificial Intelligence (PC) 
Strategies, Local Search Algorithms, Hill Climbing, 
Constraint Satisfaction Problems, Backtracking, 
Adversarial Search, Min-Max algorithms, Propositional 
Logic, Reasoning Patterns, First-order logic, Syntax, 
Semantics, Q-value, Policy, 
Neural Networks, Gradient Descent, Optimization, Technique Deep Learning (PC) 
Regularization, Autoencoder, Convolutional Neural 
Network, Recurrent Neural Network, LSTM, Deep 
Generative Models, Generative Adversarial Network 
(GAN), Deep Belief Network, Deep Convolutional 
GAN, Variational Autoencoder, Representation 
Learning, Unsupervised Pre-training, Transfer 
Learning, Distributed Representation, Domain 
Adaptation, Neural Language Model, Adversarial 
Learning 
Accuracy-explainabilitytradeoff, Interpretability Technique Dependable AI (PC) 
problem, Predictability, Transparency, Traceability, 
Causality, Reasoning, Attention and Saliency, 
Interpretable AI, Prediction Consistency, Adversarial 
Robustness, Trustworthy AI, Integrity, Reproducibility, 
Accountability, Bias-free AI, Verified AI, Federated 
Learning, Differential Privacy, 

 3 



 Convexity, Linear programming, Duality, Integer Core and Optimization for Machine 
programming, Nonlinear programming, Lagrange Technique Learning (PC) 
multipliers, First and second order conditions, Local 
and global convergence, Gradient descent methods 

Decision-making, Utility Theory, Utility Functions, Core Advanced AI (PE) 
Decision Networks, Sequential Decision Problems, 
Partially Observable MDP, Game Theory, 
Reinforcement Learning, Generalization, Policy Search, 
Hidden Markov Model, Kalman Filter, Knowledge 
Representation, Ontological Engineering, Situation 
Calculus, Semantic Networks, Description Logic, 
Planning graphs, Partial-order Planning, Conditional 
Planning, Continuous Planning, Multi-agent Planning, 
Hierarchical Task Network Planning, Non-deterministic 
Domains 
Kernel Machines, Variants of Support Vector Machines, Core and Advanced Machine 
PAC Theory, Boosting, Graphical Models, Structural Techniques Learning (PE) 
Predictions, Deep Reinforcement Learning, Sparse 
Coding 
Computational complexity of AI models, Prediction Systems and Resource-constrained 
accuracy, Numeric accuracy, Precision, Memory Technique Artificial Intelligence (PE) 
footprints, Edge AI, Memory Optimization of Models, 
Hardware accelerators for Edge AI, Vision Processing 
Unit, Streaming Hybrid Architecture Vector Engine, 
Open Neural Network Exchange 
Search Engine Architecture, Retrieval Models, Technique Information Retrieval (PE) 
Performance Evaluation, Text Categorization, Text 
Clustering, Web Information Retrieval, Structured 
Document Retrieval 
Graph algorithms, Directed and Undirected graph, Core Graph Theoretic 
Planner graph, Graph coloring, Hamiltonion and Algorithms (PE) 
Eulorian graph, Bipartite graphs, Trees. 
Streaming Algorithms, Stream mining using Clustering, Core and Stream Analytics (PE) 
Massive Data Clustering, Data Stream Classification, Technique 
Distributed Mining of Streaming Data, Change 
Diagnosis, Forecasting on Stream, Dimensionality 
Reduction for Streaming data. 

HCI and User experience, Prototyping techniques and Technique Human-Machine 
Social evaluation, Interface design and interaction, Speculative and Systems Interaction (PC) 
Sensing design, Value sensitive design 

Visual World, Geometry, Lights and Optics, Tracking, Technique Introduction to AR and 
Motion, Depth, devices and tools VR (PE) 

Graphs, Network Models, Network Data Generation, Technique Social Networks (PE) 
Structural Properties, Link Prediction, Community 
Detection, Information Cascade, Small World 
Phenomenon, Homophily, Structural Balance, 
Components, NetworkX, Gephi, Network Evolution, 
Multi-layer network 

Data and Representing data, Data science ecosystem, data Techniques Data Engineering (PC) 
Distributed sources, data storage, data model, Structured data, and Systems 
Sciences unstructured data, semi-structured data, Accessing 

data, SQL, NoSQL databases, parallel data reads/writes 
for high throughput, distributed database, Analysing 
data, distributed data processing 
Data Visualization, Data representation, feature Techniques Data Visualization (PC) 
representations, encoded representations, Spatial data and Systems 
representation, Time-series data representations, 

 4 



 visualization of multivariate data, geometry,   
Information illustration, Maps and Graphics, Advanced 
Visualization, Interactive graphics, infographics, 
visualization of high dimensional data 
Multivariate analysis, Sampling theory, Matrix Techniques Maths for Big Data (PC) 
decomposition, Algorithms for big matrices, Data and Systems 
intensive processing 

Decision Computational Neuroscience Models: Descriptive,  Computational 
Sciences Mechanistic and Interpretive models, Synapse, Neural Neuroscience (PE) 
and encoding, Neural decoding, Neuron models, Spikes, 
Cognition Modeling connections between neurons, Synaptic 

plasticity and learning, Unsupervised and supervised 
learning from the perspective of neurons 
Biological signals, Biomedical imaging modalities,  Bio-imaging (PE) 
Sectioning, Multimodal images, Reconstruction, Image 
segmentation, Object delineation, Classification, Image 
registration, Deep Learning for Bio-imaging, Tracking, 
Interactive image analysis 

Application Image digitization, Pixel relationships and distances, Technique Digital Image Processing 
s Camera model and stereo imaging, Image transforms, (PE) 

Image Enhancement: Spatial and Frequency domain, 
Image Restoration, Image segmentation, Color image 
processing, image morphology, Image compression and 
coding, Image features 
Spoken language technology, dialog and conversational Techniques Speech Understanding 
systems, automatic speech recognition, speech (PE) 
synthesis, affect detection, dialogue management. 
Image formation and transformations, Camera Techniques Computer Vision (PE) 
calibration, Image restoration, Spatial and Wavelet- 
based processing, Epipolar Geometry, SfM, Optical 
flow, Key-point detection, Feature description and 
matching, Deep learning for vision, Applications 
Geometric primitives, clipping, viewing, rendering, Technique Computer Graphics (PE) 
animation, Shading, Coloring, OpenGL 

Word representation, NLP tasks, Seq2Seq model, Applications Natural Language 
Question Answering, Sentiment Analysis, Dialogue Understanding (PE) 
system, Machine Translation, natural language 
generation, Interpretability, Knowledge Graphs 
Biometric system design, Genesis of biometrics, System Applications Advanced Biometrics (PE) 
architecture, Performance evaluation, Biometric 
modalities, Biometric security, Biometric devices, 
Biomedical applications 
Multi-dimensional signals, systems, transforms and Applications Video Processing (PE) 
sampling; Camera models; Motion and shape 
estimation; Video segmentation and tracking; Video 
filtering, compression and restoring; Ego-centric, 360- 
degree and Streaming video 

 5 



7. Course Categories, credit distribution and Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes 
 

Table 2. ProposedCourse Categories and credit distribution in the proposed B.Tech. Programmes 
S.N. Course Type Course Category Regular B.Tech. Double B.Tech. 

Credit Total Credit Total 
1 Institute Core (I) Engineering (IE) 34 69 34 59 

Science (IS) 16 16 
Humanities (IH) 12 9 

2 Programme Linked (L) Science (LS) 7 0 
3 Programme Core (P) Programme Compulsory (PC) 51 71 47+3 71 

Programme Electives (PE) 17 21-3 
B.Tech. Project (PP) 3 3 

4 Open (O) Open Electives (OE) 10 10 0 0 
5 Engineering Science (E) Engineering Science Core (EC) 0 0 22 22 

Engineering Science Elective (EE) 0 0 8,11 8 
Total Graded 150  160 

6 Non-Graded (N) Humanities (NH) 6 15 6 15 
Engineering (NE) 3 3 
Design/Practical Experience (ND) 6 6 

Total Graded + Non-Graded 165  175 

 6 



8. Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes 
 

Table 4. Credit Structure for B.Tech. Programmes (Up 6000 Level) 
Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact hours Total Credits 

Contact Hours Beyond Contact Total Hours (TC=TH/3) 
(CH) Hours (BCH) (TH) 

1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1 
1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 hr 2 hr 3hr 1 
1 hour of Lab/Project 0-0-1 1 hr 0.5 hr 1.5 hr 0.5 

#Contact hour for projects refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc. 

 7 



9. List of Programme Compulsory Courses 
 

Table 5. Programme Compulsory Courses 
Sr. No Course Name LTP Contact Hours Credit 

1 Data Structure and Algorithms 3-0-2 5 4 
2 Maths for Computing 3-1-0 4 4 
3 Principles of Computer Systems - 1 (Compilers and 2-0-2 4 3 

CA) 
4 Data Engineering 3-0-3 6 4.5 
5 Human-Machine Interaction 0-0-4 4 2 
6 Design and Analysis of Algorithms 3-1-0 4 4 
7 Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0 3 3 
8 Optimization for ML 3-0-3 6 4.5 
9 Principles of Computer Systems - 2 3-0-2 4 4 
10 Data Visualization 3-0-3 6 4.5 
11 Deep Learning 3-0-3 6 4.5 
12 Dependable AI 3-0-0 3 3 
13 DSAI Core Elective 1 (DS + X) 3-0-0 3 3 
14 DSAI Core Elective 2 (AI + X) 3-0-0 3 3 
15 Maths for Big Data* 2-1-0 3 3 

Total 51 
*For Core ES + AI&DS program, under DS+X for regular program, Ethics, Policy, Law and Regulations in AI 
(0- 0-2) is a core course under Professional Ethics - II (Sem VI). 

 8 



10. Area-wise Programme Elective Courses 
 

Table 6. Stream-wise Programme Electives Courses 
S. No. Stream Courses L-T-P Credit 

1  Advanced Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0 3 
2  Advanced Machine Learning 3-0-0 3 
3  Resource Constrained Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0 3 
4 AI and ML Scalable Machine Learning 3-0-0 3 
5 Computational Learning Theory 3-0-0 3 
6 Information Retrieval 3-0-0 3 
7 Graph Theoretic Algorithms 3-0-0 3 
8 Stream Analytics 3-0-0 3 
9  Introduction to Robotics 3-0-0 3 
10 Robotics and Planning and Decision Making of Robots 3-0-0 3 
11 Automation Multi-Agent Systems 3-0-0 3 
12 Autonomous Systems 3-0-0 3 
13  Multimodal Interfaces 0-0-2 2 
14  Introduction to Haptics 3-0-0 3 
15 Socio-Digital Reality Introduction to AR and VR 3-0-0 3 
16 Advanced Human-Machine Interaction 3-0-0 3 
17 Social Networks 3-0-0 3 
18  Computational Neuroscience 3-0-0 3 
19 Science of Intelligence Connectomics 3-0-0 3 
20 Bioimaging 3-0-0 3 
21  Digital Image Processing 3-0-0 3 
22  Computer Vision 3-0-0 3 
23  Natural Language Understanding 3-0-0 3 
24  Speech Understanding 3-0-0 3 
25 Applications Computational Linguistics 3-0-0 3 
26 Advanced Biometrics 3-0-0 3 
27 Computer Graphics 3-0-0 3 
28 Video Processing 3-0-0 3 
29 Animation 3-0-0 3 
30 GPU Programming 3-0-0 3 
31  Introduction to Cyber Physical Systems 3-0-0 3 
32 Cyber Physical Systems, Embedded Systems Design 3-0-0 3 
33 Sensors and Internet of Security in CPS 3-0-0 3 
34 Things Edge and Fog Computing 3-0-0 3 
35 Real Time Systems 3-0-0 3 
36  Introduction to Space Science 3-0-0 3 
37  Reliability Engineering and Life Testing 3-0-0 3 
38 Data and Discovery Introduction to Game Theory 3-0-0 3 
39 Science Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos 3-0-0 3 
40 Differential Geometry 3-0-0 3 
41 Introduction to Financial Engineering 3-0-0 3 
42 Computational Chemistry 3-0-0 3 
43  Special Topics in ML 3-0-0 3 
44 Special Topics Special Topics: Advancements in Computer Vision 3-0-0 3 
45 Special Topics in Data Science 3-0-0 3 

 9 



11. Specialization to be offered by the department 

Table 7a. Specialization and courses 
S. Name of Specialization Core (8 Specialization Elective (12 Credits) 

No. Specialization credits) 
   Digital Image Processing, Video Processing and 
   Analysis, Advanced Machine Learning, 
   Introduction to AR and VR, Scalable Machine 

Learning, Computational Photography, 
 Visual Computing (CS, Computer Graphics (3-0-0), 

1. AI&DS, EE) Computer Vision (3-0-0), Computational Imaging, Principles of Biological 
Visual Computing Lab (0-0- Vision, Bioimaging, Medical Image Analysis, 
4) Visual Perception, Advancements in Computer 

Vision, Animation, Real-time Vision 
Architecture, Image Synthesis, 3D Shape 
Analysis, Image and Video Forensics, Selected 
Topics in Computer Vision, Project (0-0-12) 

  Social Network (3-0-0), Introduction to Haptics, Design Process, Speech 
2. Socio-Digital Reality Introduction to AR and VR Understanding, Computer Graphics, HCI, NLU, 

(CS, AI&DS, EE) (3-0-0), Multimodal Computer Vision, Visual Perception, Image and 
interface Lab (0-0-4) Video Forensics, Project (0-0-12) 

 Intelligent   
3. Communications and Jointly with EE Jointly with EE 

Networking 

4. Robotics Jointly with RM-IDRP Jointly with RM-IDRP 

5. AIOT Jointly with EE Jointly with EE 

   Algorithm for big data, computer vision, 
   machine learning with big data, edge and fog 
 AI  computing, NLP, GPU Programming, Data 

6. (for non-AI, non-CS AI (3-0-0), Deep Learning Visualization, Introduction to AR and VR, 
Students) (3-0-0), AI Lab (0-0-4) Dependable AI, Resource constrained AI, Social 

Network Analysis, Optimization, Computer 
Graphics, Advanced AI, Advanced ML, Project 
(0-0-12) 

*Science of Intelligence, Smart Healthcare, and Language Technologies Specializations will be added in 
the future 

 
Table 7b. AI+X courses. 

S. No. Course Status 
1. AI + Industry 4.0 Jointly with ME 

2 Autonomous Systems IDRP 
3. AI + Transportation CSE 

 
Table 7c. DS+X (Applied Statistics) courses. 

S. No. Course Status 
1. Maths for Big Data CS+Math course 
2. Statistical Inference and Simulation Techniques Maths course 
3. Introduction to Financial Engineering Maths course 
4. Time Series Analysis Math course 

 10 



12. Curriculum of B.Tech. AI&DS (Regular) 
 

Table 8b. Curriculum of B.Tech. in AI&DS 
Cat Course LTP CH NC GC Cat Course LTP CH NC GC 

 I Semester  II Semester 
IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IE Engineering 2-1-0 3 - 3 

Electrical Mechanics 
Engineering 

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IS Chemistry 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Computer 
Science 

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IS Physics 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Bioengineering 

      IS Chemistry Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1 
      IS Physics Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1 

IS Mathematics I 3-1-0 4 - 4 IS Mathematics II 3-1-0 4 - 4 
IE Engineering 0-0-2 2 - 1 IE Engineering 0-0-2 1 - 1 

Visualization Realization 
NE Engineering 0-0-2 2 1 - NE Engineering 0-0-2 2 1 - 

Design I Design II 
NH Communication 0-0-2 2 1 - NH Communication 0-0-2 2 1 - 

Skill I Skill II 
NH Social Connect 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Social Connect 0-0-1 1 0.5 - 

and and 
responsibilities I responsibilities II 

NH Performing Arts 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Performing Arts 0-0-1 1 0.5 - 
I/ Sports I II/ Sports II 

Total 12-1-14 27 3 17 Total 11-2-12 25 3 16 
 III Semester  IV Semester 

LS PSSP 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Materials Science 1 × 1 - 1 
IE i- Energy materials 2X 1-0-0 2 - 2 & Engineering 1-0-0 
ii- Computational (Electronic 
Materials Design materials) 

PC Data Structures 3-0-2 5 - 4 IE Pattern 3-0-2 5 - 4 
and Algorithms Recognition and 

Machine Learning 
PC Maths for 3-1-0 4 0 4 IE Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4 - 4 

Computing 
IE Signals and 3-1-0 4 - 4 PC HMI PCS-1 PCS-2 0-0-4 4 - 2 

Systems 2-0-2 2 - 3 
LS Quantum Info 3-0-0 3 - 3 3-0-2 4 - 4 

Processing 
NE Intro. To 0-0-2 2 1  IH Humanities I 3-0-0 3 - 3 

Profession 
Total 17-3-4 24 1 21 Total 15-1-10 24 - 21 

 V Semester  VI Semester 
PC DA of 3-1-0 4  4 PC Data 3-0-3 6  4.5 

Algorithms   -  Visualization   -  
Artificial 3-0-0 3 - 3 Deep Learning 3-0-3 6 - 4.5 
Intelligence 3-0-3 6 - 4.5 AI+X / DS+ X 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Optimization in    Dependable AI 3-0-0 3 3 
ML  
Data Engineering   

3-0-3 6 4.5 

 11 



IH Humanities II 3-0-0 3 - 3 PE Programme/ 6-0-0 6  6 
Open Elective 

NH Professional 0-1-0  1 - NH Ethics, Policy, 0-0-2  1 - 
Ethics I Law and 

Regulations in AI 
Total 15-2-6 22 1 19 Total 18-0-4 24 1 21 

 VII Semester  VIII Semester 
PP B. Tech. Project 0-0-6 6 - 3 IH Humanities IV 3-0-0 3 - 3 

PCPE AI+X / DS+ X 3-0-0 3 - 3 PE/ Programme/ 15-0-0 15 - 15 
/ Programme/ 6-0-0 6 6 OE Open Electives 

OE Open Electives 
IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3       

IS Environmental Sci 2-0-0 2 - 2       

Total 14-0-6 21 - 17 Total 18-0-0 18 - 18 
Total of graded and Non-Graded Credit 9 150 

Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 
Grand Total 165 

 12 



13. Curriculum of Double B.Tech. : B.Tech. AI&DS Engineering and Engineering Science 
 

Table 9. Programme structure of Double B.Tech. 
Cat Course LTP CH N GC Cat Course LTP CH NC GC 

C 
 I Semester  II Semester 
First two semesters same as Table 8a or 8 b 33 Graded and 6 non graded credits 
 III Semester  IV Semester 

ES Probability, Statistics, 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Materials 3 × 3 - 3 
Stochastic Processes Science & 1-0-0 

Engineering 
ES Modern Physics 3-0-0 3 - 3 ES Embedded 3-0-2 5 - 4 

Systems and 
IoT 

IE Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Pattern 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Recognition 
and Machine 
Learning 

ES Data Structures and 3-0-2 5 - 4 ES Design of 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Algorithms Experiments 

IE Signals and Systems 3-1-0 4 - 4 ES Modelling and 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Simulation 

NE Intro. To Profession 0-0-2 2 1  IH Humanities I 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Total 15-3-4 22 1 19 Total 18-0-6 24 - 21 

 V Semester  VI Semester 
PC Maths for Comp. 3-1-0 4 - 4 PC PCS-1 2-0-2 2   3 

 DA of Algorithm 3-1-0 4 - 4  PCS-2 3-0-2 4 6 - 4 
 Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0 3 - 3  Data Engg 3-0-3 6  - 4.5 
 Optimization in ML   -   Data 3-0-3   - 4.5 
 HMI 3-0-3 6  4.5  Visualization  6    
       Deep Learning 3-0-3    4.5 
  0-0-4 4  2  AI+X / DS+ X  3    
       Dependable AI 3-0-0 3   3 
        3-0-0    3 

PE Programme/ 3-0-0 3  3       
Engineering Science 
Elective/ Multimodal 
Bouquet (3) 

IH Humanities II 3-0-0 3 - 3       
NH Professional Ethics I 0-1-0  1 - NH Ethics, 0-0-2  1 - 

 Policy
, Law 
 and 
Regulations
 i
n 
AI 

Total 18-3-7 27 1 23.5 Total 20-0-15 30 1 26.5 
 VII Semester  VIII Semester 

PP B. Tech. Project 0-0-6 6 - 3 PE/ Programme/ 14-0-0 14 - 14 
ES Engineering 

 13 



       Science     
Electives 

PC AI+X / DS+ X 3-0-0 3  3 IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Maths for Big Data 2-1-0 3 - 3 

- 
PE/ Programme/ 9-0-0 9 - 9       
OE Engineering Science 

Electives/ 
Multimodal Bouquet 
(3) 

IS Environmental Science 2-0-0 2 - 2       

Total 16-1-6 25 - 20 Total 17-0-0 17 - 17 

Total of graded and Non-Graded Credit 9 160 

Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 

Grand Total 175 

Note: ES are proposed Engineering Science compulsory courses 
 
 

 

 14

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Course Booklet
for

M.Tech. (AI)
and

Dual degree M.Tech. (AI) + PhD
Programs

offered by the

Department of Computer Science and Engineering

July 2021



Introduction:

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a branch of computer science that aims to create machines to act with
higher levels of intelligence and emulate the human capabilities of sense, comprehend and act. The
core problems of artificial intelligence include programming computers for certain traits such as
Knowledge, Reasoning, Problem-solving, Perception, Learning and Planning. AI technology
development and applications are evolving rapidly with major implications for economies and
societies. As the demand for such applications increases, there is also an increasing need for building
the future workforce for AI. For developing the AI ecosystem, this program will be executed in
synergy with other M.Tech programs running in IIT Jodhpur, such as Sensors & IoT, Cyber-Physical
Systems, and Advanced Manufacturing and Design.

Objectives:
This M.Tech in AI programme will offer students with deep knowledge of both fundamental AI
technologies, as well as application-oriented AI. A student completing this program will be capable to
undertake careers in industry as well as academia. He/She will have the option to explore a variety of
domains including Manufacturing, Fintech, Healthcare, Agriculture/Food Processing, Education,
Retail/Customer Engagement, Human and Robot interaction/intelligent automation, Smart City , Aid
for Differently Abled/Accessibility Technology.

Expected Graduate Attributes:
After completing this programme, a student will be able to develop an ability to:

1. Comprehend fundamental concepts and hands-on knowledge of the state-of-the-art AI
methodologies.

2. Design and Build real-world AI systems for complex planning, decision making and learning,
solving application-specific problems, and to reason about them.

3. Conceive, Design and Develop Intelligent multi-modal multi-sensory Man-Machine interfaces.
4. Design, Develop and Deploy machine learning based applications using structured and

unstructured data (e.g., speech, text, images/videos).
5. Understand and Assess reliability, dependability and trust-worthiness of AI-based systems.
6. Design and develop AI applications for resource constrained environments.
7. Adhere to evolving ethics and privacy laws across various domains and territories.
8. Plan and manage technical projects.

Learning Outcome:
1. Understand the fundamentals of Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Inference Engines,

Speech, Vision, Natural Language Understanding, Robotics, and Human Computer
Interaction.

2. Unify the knowledge of human cognition, AI, Machine Learning and data engineering for
designing systems.

3. Demonstrate hands-on knowledge of state-of-the-art AI tools for real-world problem-solving.
4. Ability to develop real-time and robust AI-based systems with specific software, hardware

and data requirements.
5. Build solutions to explore fully immersive computer-generated worlds (in VR), and overlay

computer graphics onto our view of our immediate environment (AR) along with smart,
cognitive functionality.

6. Demonstrate advanced skills to comprehend and communicate effectively.



7. Carry out projects using intelligent cognitive solutions provided by AI algorithms to get more
insights in stakeholder management, risk modeling, intelligent resource scheduling and
managing project constraints with intelligent use of data models.



Course Structure for
M.Tech. (AI) Program and Dual degree M.Tech. (AI) + PhD

Cat Code Course Title L-T-P Cr Cat Code Course Title L-T-P Cr
Semester 0

* Bridge Course on DSA
I Semester II Semester

C MAL7xx0 Optimization 2-0-0 2 C CSL7xx0 Deep Learning 3-0-0 3
C CSL7xx0 Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0 3 C CSL7xx0 DL-Ops 0-0-2 1
C CSL7xx0 Advanced Data Structures 2-0-0 2 C CSL7xx0 Core Bucket: Advanced Artificial 3-0-0 3

and Algorithms Intelligence/ Autonomous
Systems

C CSP7xx0 Machine Learning 3-0-0 3 PE xxxxx Program Elective 2 3-0-0 3
C xxxxx ML-Ops 0-0-2 1 PE xxxxx Program Elective 3 3-0-0 3
PE xxxxx Program Elective 1 3-0-0 3 OE xxxxx Open Elective 1 3-0-0 3
NG xxxxx Technical Communication 1-0-0 1 NG xxxxx Ethics and Professional Life 1-0-0 1

Total Credits: 15 Total Credits: 17

Cat Code Course Title L-T-P Cr Cat Code Course Title L-T-P Cr
III Semester IV Semester

P CSDxx0 Major Project – Part 1 0-0-10 5 P CSDxx0 Major Project – Part 2 0-0-22 11
PE xxxxx Program Elective 4 3-0-0 3 PE xxxxx Program Elective 6 3-0-0 3
PE xxxxx Program Elective 5 3-0-0 3 NG xxxxx Intellectual Property 1-0-0 1
OE xxxxx Open Elective - 2 3-0-0 3
NG xxxxx System Engineering and 1-0-0 1

Project Management
Total Credits: 15 Total Credits: 15

Credit Distribution **List of Prescriptive Electives
1 Program Core 18 credits 1 Linear algebra for data science
2 Program Electives 18 credits 2 Statistics for Data Science
3 Open Electives 6 credits
4 Project 16 credits
5 Non-graded 4 credits

Total 62 credits

*The students should have satisfactory performance in the course in order to be eligible for internships and
placements opportunities from the institute.
**Depending on the background of students, courses from the prescriptive electives can be recommended for
students by the DRC.



Program Electives for M.Tech. (AI) and
Dual Degree M.Tech. (AI) + Ph.D. Program

Courses offered by Department of Computer Science and Engineering

Animation Health Informatics
Advanced Artificial Intelligence Information Retrieval
Advanced Computer Graphics Introduction to AR and VR
Advanced ML Machine Learning with Big Data
Advanced Biometrics Medical Image Analysis
Advancements in Computer Vision Natural Language Processing
Advanced Human-Machine Interaction Neuromorphic Computing and Design
Algorithms for Big Data Principles of Biological Vision
Bio-image computing Autonomous Systems
Bioimaging Reliability Engineering and Life Testing
Blockchain Resource Constrained Artificial Intelligence
Cryptography Scalable Machine Learning
Computer Graphics Selected Topics in AI - I/II/III
Computer Vision Selected Topics in CS - I/II/III
Computational Learning Theory Selected Topics in ML - 1/2/3
Computer Architecture Social Network Analysis
Crowd-sourcing and Human Computing Social Networks (700)
Data Visualization Software and Data Engineering
Dependable AI Security and its Applications
Digital Image Analysis Speech Understanding
Edge and Fog Computing Stream Analytics
Ethics, Policy, Law and Regulation in AI Vehicular Ad-hoc Networks
Embedded Systems Visual Perception
GPU Programming Virtualization and Cloud Computing
Graph Theory and Applications Advanced Data Structures and Algorithms (Fractal 3)
Graph Theoretic Algorithms

Courses offered by Department of Electrical Engineering

Adaptive Signal Processing Digital Video Processing
Advanced Digital Signal Processing Introduction to Haptics
Compressive Sensing Introduction to Cyber-Physical Systems
Computational Imaging Machine Learning for Communication
Digital Signal Processing and Applications Introduction to Smart Grid
Data Compression Speech and Audio Signal Processing
Cyber Physical System Modelling and Simulation lab Statistical Decision Theory

Wavelets

Courses offered by Department of Mechanical Engineering

Robotics Planning and Decision Making for Robots

Courses offered by Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering

Bioinformatics Computational Biology



Courses offered by Department of Mathematics

Advanced Topics in Computational PDE Linear Algebra for Data Science
AI for Finance Statistics for Data Science
Computational finance Stochastic Processes
Computational Game Theory Mathematical modeling and simulations
Linear Algebra with Data

Courses offered by Department of Physics

Quantum Information Processing Quantum Cryptography and Coding

Courses offered by IDRP Digital Humanities

Analysis of Social Media Networks Fundamentals of Digital Humanities: Fractal - 2 (Data
Human Factors in Interaction Design and Knowledge representations)
Digital Methods and Tools

Courses offered by School of AIDE

Cognitive Architectures Differential Geometry
Introduction to Financial Engineering Introduction to Game Theory
Computational Neuroscience Machine Learning for Epidemiology
Connectomics Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos
Computational Cognition & Behavior Modelling Optimization in ML

Special Topics in Data Science - 1/2/3

Courses offered by School of Management and Entrepreneurship

AI for Risk Analysis Risk Management Analytics
Stochastic Modelling

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 

 

   

 

 

 

 

PG Course Booklet 

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 

July 2019 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

M.Tech  & M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree  

 in  

Data and Computational Science 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
(1) Introduction 

Data Science is the art of generating insight, knowledge and predictions by processing of data 
gathered about a system or a process. Computational Science is the art of developing validated 
(simulation) models in order to gain a better understanding of a phenomenon (system’s or 
processes). Computational sciences focus on development of causal models using latent patterns in 
the observed data, rather than only extracting patterns or knowledge from data by statistical 
methods.  
 
(2) Objective of the Programme 

To produce  professionals with deep knowledge and innovative analytical and computational 
research skills to handle problems in a variety of domains including governance, finance, security, 
transportation, healthcare, energy management, agriculture, population studies, weather 
prediction, economics, social sciences, predictive maintenance, structural health monitoring, smart 
manufacturing and computational structural biology. 
 
(3) Expected Graduate Attributes (M.Tech.) 

1. Skill set to clean, process, analyze, manage and handle security and privacy aspects of 
structured and unstructured data. 

2. Ability to identify, design and apply appropriate pattern recognition and data mining 
methods for generating relevant insight from data. 

3. Knowledge and capability to develop and apply machine learning techniques for data driven 
modelling. 

4. Ability to develop models and simulation schemes based upon domain knowledge in chosen 
domains and possible combination with data driven models. 

5. Capability to follow uniquely interdisciplinary approach for solving problems, using 
knowledge of mathematics, statistics, computing and one or more selected domains among  
physics, chemistry, biology and engineering sciences. 

6. Skill to use and design appropriate visualization techniques for representation and 
presentation of insights and solutions.  

7. Ability to innovate and contribute towards next generation data driven technology 
development.  

8. High quality technical communication skills. 
9. Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics.  
10. Ability to plan and manage technical projects. 

 
(4) Learning outcome: 

1. Strong Understanding of fundamentals of Data Mining, Machine Learning,  Modelling & 
Simulation, Optimization and Numerical Techniques. 

2. Basic understanding of Cryptographic and Blockchain Techniques. 
3. Knowledge about basics and use of visual analytics. 
4. Skill set to develop applications using Big Data.  
5. Advanced analytical and data driven modelling and simulation skills to address technological 

challenges in one or more specialized knowledge  domains like physics, chemistry, biology 
and engineering sciences. 

6. Demonstrate skills to communicate scientific ideas and/or application systems.  
7. Acquire project management skills. 

 
 

 

 



(5) Program Structure: 

Cat. Course Course Title L-T-P Credits Cat. Course Course Title L-T-P Credits 
Number Number 

Semester 1 Semester 2 
C MAL7XX0 Introduction to 1-0-0-0 1 C MAL7XX0 Numerical 1-0-0-0 1 

Data Science Methods for PDE 
C CSL7XX0 Machine 3-0-0-0 3 C CSL8XX0 Machine Learning 3-0-0-0 3 

Learning 1 2 
C MAL7XX0 Mathematics for 3-0-0-0 3 C CSL7XX2 Software and 1-0-0-0 1 

Data Science Data 
Architecture* 

C MAL7XX0 Statistics 2 2-0-0-0 2 C CSL7XX0 Security and its 3-0-0-0 3 
Application 

C MAL7XX0 Introduction to 1-0-0-0 1 C MAP7XX0 Data Analytics 0-0-2-0 1 
Modeling Lab 

E xxxxx PE1 3-0-0-0 3 E Xxxxx PE2 3-0-0-0 3 
C CSP7XX0 Data structures 0-0-2-0 1 E Xxxxx PE3 3-0-0-0 3 

and practices 
NG xxxxx Technical 1-0-0-0 1 NG xxxxx Innovation andIP 1-0-0-0 1 

Communication  Management  
 

Total 15 Total 16 
Semester 3 Semester 4 

E xxxxx PE4 3-0-0-0 3 E Xxxxx OE2 3-0-0-0 3 
E xxxxx PE5 3-0-0-0 3      
E xxxxx OE1 3-0-0-0 3      
P MA6xx   Project 0-0-0-5 5 P MA6xx   Project 0-0-0- 11 

11 
NG xxxxx System 1-0-0-0 1 NG xxxxx Professional Ethics 1-0-0- 1 

Engineering and  0 
Project 
Management 

Total 15 Total 15 
Grand Total 61 

*A fractal from the course. 

 

 Credit Distribution 
S.No. Category Course  Total Total 

Category Title Courses Credits 
1 C Compulsory  9 18 
2 C Labs 2 02 
3 PE Program Electives 5 15 
4 OE Open Electives 2 6 
5 P Project 1 16 

Total (without non-graded courses)  57 
 
  



(6) Topic Cloud 

Compulsory Topics: 

(a) Data pre-processing (including redundancy removal), Data storage, data 
representation, data handling, data query, data cleaning. 

(b) Relational data bases, graph databases, NoSQL (columnar DB), unstructured data, 
Map reduced techniques and Indexing. 

(c) Distributions, test of hypothesis, stochastic process, queuing process, sampling 
techniques, Probabilistic models, Mixture models, Latent Models, prediction models, 
Association Analysis, Correlation analysis, Evaluation and Validation, performance 
analysis/metrics 

(d) Vector and matrix algebra, Decompositions, SVD, pseudo inverse, rank approximation 
(e) Linear and Non-linear Programming. 
(f) Classification, regression, prediction, clustering, anomaly detection, feature 

engineering, supervised/ unsupervised Learning, Fundamental of SVM, Kernel 
techniques, States space machine, Markov decision process, ANN, Deep learning and 
its implementation, Deep learning application lab (GPU environment, Python 
environment) , Higher level Machine learning, Transfer learning, online and 
incremental learning, reinforcement learning, explain-ability in Machine Learning, Bias 
variance trade-off, ensemble learning, Auto ML 

(g) Discrete models, continuous models, Hybrid models (both analytical and data driven 
models), assumptions, approximations, models validation, MCS 

(h) Numerical methods for PDEs 
(i) Cryptosystems (types) 

 

Elective Topics: 

Financial engineering, Computational finance, Computational Game Theory, Graph Theory, 
Dynamical Systems, Reliability Theory, Stochastic Processes, Representation of Finite Groups, 
Computational linguistics, Computational economics, Digital Humanities, Cultural informatics, 
Blockchain, security and privacy, AR/VR, Natural Language Processing and Text analytics, 
Visualization, Machine learning for big data, Human-machine interface, Computational 
modelling in materials design, Bioinformatics, Computational biology, Digital Image Analysis, 
Coding Theory, Robotics, Computational electro magnetism, Computational optics, Quantum 
Information System, Quantum Cryptography, Quantum Computing, Computational Physics, 
Computational material science, Computational chemistry, adaptive numerical methods, 
multi-grid methods, parallel methods, GPU computation. 

 

  



 

(7) List of Program Electives 

(a) Electives from sister Departments: 

S.No. Course Title S.No. Course Title 
Department of Mathematics Department of Electrical Engineering 

1 Financial Engineering 19 Digital Image Processing and 
Applications 

2 Computational Game Theory 20 Digital Video Processing 
3 Advanced topics in computational PDE 21 Coding Theory 

22 Compressive Sensing 
4 Dynamical Systems 23 Machine Learning for Communication 
5 Reliability Theory 24 Compressive Sensing 
6 Stochastic Processes 25 Data Compression 
7 Representation of Finite Groups Department of Mechanical Engineering 
8 Shared Computational Economics 26 Robotics 

Department of Humanities and Social 27 Probabilistic Methods in Engineering 
Sciences Department of Physics 

9 Cultural informatics 28 Computational Physics 
Department of Computer Science and 29 Computational material science 
Engineering Department of Chemistry 

10 Computational linguistics 30 Computational Chemistry 
11 Introduction to Virtual and Augmented Department of Metallurgical and Materials 

Reality Engineering 
12 Natural Language Processing 31 Computational Materials Engineering 
13 Visualization/Data Visualization Department of Biosciences and 
14 Artificial Intelligence 1 bioengineering 
15 Artificial Intelligence 2 32 Omics Technologies 
16 Human Machine Interface 33 Algorithm development 
17 Graph Theory and its Applications 34 Computational modeling in material 
17 Bio-image Computing design 
18 Computer Vision 35 Applications in Multi Omics data, 

Imaging, Sensors 
 

(b) Electives from IDRPs: 

Digital Humanities 
1 Introduction to Digital Humanities 

Quantum Computing 
2 Introduction to Quantum Information 
3 Quantum Computing 
4 Facets of Quantum Information 
5 Quantum Cryptography and Coding 

 

(c) Specialized electives: 

1 Selected Topics in Data and Computational Science - I (1-0-0-0) 
2 Selected Topics in Data and Computational Science - II (2-0-0-0) 
3 Selected Topics in Data and Computational Science - III (3-0-0-0) 

 

  



(8) Content of compulsory courses: 
 

Title Introduction of Data Science Number MAL7XX0 

Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 1–0–0-0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  

1. Introduce the basics of data science and its underlying concepts.  
2. Introduce data processing, manipulation and cleaning techniques. 

 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Acquire familiarity with the basic concepts of data science. 
2. Distinguish between different kinds of data and data governance. 
3. Understand the preparation and processing of the data. 

 
Contents  
[14 Lectures] Data preparation, Data pre-processing, Data Cleaning, Data Integration, Data 
Transformation, Data Reduction, Redundancy Removal, Data storage, Data Handling, Querying 
Data, Data Representation and Exploration, Big Data. 
 
Text Books  

1. Kotu, V. and Deshpande, B. (2018) Data Science: Concepts and Practice, Morgan 
Kaufmann. 

2. Saltz, J.S. and Stanton, J.M. (2017) An Introduction to Data Science, SAGE Publications. 
3. Kelleher, J.D., and Tierney, B. (2018) Data Science, MIT Press. 

 
Reference Books  

1. Moreira, J., Carvalho, A. and Horvath, T. (2018) A General Introduction to Data Analytics, 
John Wiley & Sons. 

2. Mayer-Schonberger, V. and Cukier, K., (2013) Big data: The essential guide to work, life 
and learning in the age of insight, John Murray Publications. 

 
Online course Material  
Not Available 
 
 

 

  



 
Title Mathematics for Data Science Number MAL7XX0 

Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 1–0–0-0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  

1. Provide an understanding statistical concepts for data scientist. 
2. Train the student to do Matrix Computations for implementing various numerical 

linear algebra algorithms. 
3. Train student in the domain of linear and non-linear programming. 

 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Derive distributional results needed for the statistical hypothesis testing and perform 
the hypothesis testing for the parameters of the normal population. 

2. Understand the numerical linear algebraic methods and their usage for data analysis. 
3. Apply programming concepts for further applications in different areas of interest. 

 
Contents:  

MAL7XX1: Statistical Techniques [1-0-0-0] 

Probability Models and Sampling  Techniques[3 Lectures]: Normal, Chi-Square and t 
distributions, Basic concepts of random sampling, sampling from normal distribution, 
properties of sample mean and sample variance. 

Tests of Hypotheses[5 Lectures]: Basic concepts of statistical hypotheses testing-simple and 
composite hypotheses, critical regions, Type-I and Type-II errors, size and power of a test, 
Neyman Pearson lemma, tests for one-sample and two-sample problems from normal 
populations. 

Stochastic Processes[6 Lectures]: Definition and classification of general stochastic 
processes; Markov Chains: definition, transition probability matrices, classification of states, 
limiting properties; Poisson process, Birth and death processes, exponential queuing model. 

 

MAL7XX2: Matrix Computations [1-0-0-0] 

Matrix Algebra [3 Lectures]:Matrix operations and type of matrices, Rank of Matrix,  
Eigenvalues, Eigenvectors and Diagonalizable matrices, Vector Norms, Matrix Norms. 

Decompositions [9 Lectures]:Spectral decomposition, Schur Decomposition, QR 
Factorization, Singular value decomposition (SVD), Polar Decomposition, Pseudo Inverse. 

Approximations [2 Lectures]: Least square approximations, Low-Rank Approximation. 

 
MAL7XX3: Optimization [1-0-0-0] 

Linear Programming Problem[4 Lectures]: Linear combination of vectors, Convex set, 
Convex hull, Linear programming problem, feasible solution, basic feasible solution, 
graphical solution, Simplex method, Charne’s M method. 

Duality and IPP[6 Lectures]: Dual of an LPP, Integer Programming, Gomory’s cut-constraint 
method.  

Nonlinear Programming[4 Lectures]: First and second order conditions, Constrained 
optimization - Lagrange Multipliers, Karush-Kuhn-Tucker conditions. 

 
Text Books  

     (Fractal 1) 

1. Casella, G. and Berger, R. (2002), Statistical Inference, Cengage Learning. 
2. Ross, S.M. (1996), Stochastic Processes, Wiley. 



 

     (Fractal 2) 

3. Mayer, C.D. (2000) Matrix Analysis and Applied Linear Algebra, SIAM. 
4. Strang, G., (2006), Linear Algebra and its Applications. 
5. Elden, L. (2007) Matrix Methods in Data Mining and Pattern Recognition, SIAM. 

 

     (Fractal 3) 

6. Luenberger, D. G., Linear and Nonlinear Programming, Yinyu Ye, Third  Edition, 
Springer, 2008 

7. Kambo, N. S., Mathematical Programming Techniques,  Second Edition, Affiliated East 
West Press, 2005 

 
Reference Books  

     (Fractal 1) 

1. Rohatgi, V.K. and Saleh, A.K.M.E. (2018). An Introduction to Probability and 
Statistics, Wiley.  

2. Ross, S.M. (2010). An Introduction to Probability Models, Elsevier. 
3. Hoel, P.G., Port, S.C. and Stone, C.J. (1972). Introduction to Stochastic Processes, 

Houghton Mifflin Company. 
 
(Fractal 2) 

4. M    Goloub, G.H. and Charles, F.V.L. (2013) Matrix Computations, JHU Press. 
5. Lancaster, P. and Tismenetsky, M. (1985) The Theory of Matrices: With Applications, 

Academic Press. 
 
(Fractal 3) 

6. Bazaraa, M. S., Sherali, H.D., and Shetty, C. M., Nonlinear Programming: Theory and 
Algorithms, Third Edition, Wiley publications, 2006 

7. Darst, R, Introduction to Linear Programming: Applications and Extensions, Dekker 
Publications, 1991 
 

 
Online course Material  

(Fractal 2) 

1. Agrawal, P.N., Numerical Linear Algebra, NPTEL course material,  Department of 
Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology 
Roorkee,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107106/ 

(Fractal 3) 

2. Goswami A., Chakraborty D., Optimization, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Kharaggpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105039/ 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Title Advanced Statistical Techniques Number MAL7XX0 



Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 2–0–0-0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  

1. Provide an understanding of the statistical concepts and their real-life applications. 
 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Estimate the parameters of the underlying population; 
2. Gain the basic knowledge of mixture models, latent models, association, correlation and 

regression analysis. 
 

Contents: 
 
Estimation [4 Lectures]: Point estimation-maximum likelihood estimator, methods of evaluating 
estimators; Interval estimation- Methods of finding confidence intervals. 
 
Mixture Models and Latent Models [3 Lectures]: Basic ideas, finite mixtures, continuous mixtures, 
conditional mixing distributions; Latent models. 
 
Association and Correlation Analysis [7 lectures]: Categorical data, consistency of data, 
independence and association of attributes; Measures of association – Pearson’s and Yule’s 
measures, Goodman-Kruskal’s γ, Odds Ratio; Fitting of logit model through least squares, 
Properties of product moment correlation coefficient, Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient. 
 
Regression Analysis [14 lectures]:Model building, data collection, uses of regression; Simple linear 
regression model - Least-Squares estimation of the parameters, hypothesis testing on the slop and 
the intercept, interval estimation, prediction of new observations, coefficient of determination; 
Multiple linear regression model - estimation of the model parameters, hypothesis testing, 
confidence intervals, prediction of new observations; Model adequacy checking-residual analysis; 
Validation techniques. 
 
 
Text Books  

1. Casella, G. and Berger, R. (2002). Statistical Inference, Cengage Learning. 
2. Marshall, A.W. and Olkin, I. (2007). Life Distributions: Structure of Nonparametric, 

Semiparametric and Parametric families, Springer. 
3. Gun, A.M., Gupta, M.K. and Dasgupta, B. (1998): Fundamentals of Statistics (V-1), World 

Press. 
4. Montgomery, D.C., Peck, E.A. and Vining, G.G. (2012). Introduction to Linear Regression 

Analysis, Wiley. 
 

Reference Books  
1. Rohatgi, V.K. and Saleh, A.K.M.E. (2018). An Introduction to Probability and Statistics, 

Wiley. 
2. Draper, N.R. and Smith, H. (1998). Applied Regression Analysis, Wiley. 
3. Ross, S. (2012). Simulation, Academic Press 

 

Online course Material  
1. Panchenko, D., Statistics for Applications, Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT Open 

Courseware, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-443-statistics-for-applications-
fall-2006/#. 

 
 
  



 
Title Introduction to Modeling  Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  

The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce various modeling techniques 
2. Explain how to analyses mathematical models 

 
Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Model a given scenario using appropriate mathematical techniques 
2. Analyze and draw conclusions about the process/system under consideration 

 
Contents  
 

Principles of mathematical modeling [4 lectures]: Assumptions, approximations, abstraction, scale, 
conservation and balance principles, dimensional homogeneity and consistency, model validation  
 
Modeling Methods [10 lectures]: Continuous models, discrete models, models of hybrid systems, 
use of differential equations, variational principles, Data driven models. 
 
Textbooks  

1. Gershenfeld, N. (1999) The Nature of mathematical modelling, Cambridge University Press. 
2. Haberman, R. (1998) Mathematical models, SIAM. 

 
Reference Books  

1. Dym, C.L. (2004) Principles of mathematical modeling, Academic Press. 
2. Boccara, N. (2010) Modeling complex systems, Springer. 

  
Online Course Material  
Not available 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  



Title Numerical Methods for PDE Number MAL8XX1 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 1–0–0-0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/Ph.D.(MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will  

1. Introduce finite difference schemes for numerical solutions of partial differential equations. 
2. Carry out numerical analysis of various finite difference schemes.  

 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Apply finite difference schemes for numerical solution of partial differential equations. 
2. Undertake out error analysis and stability analysis of finite difference schemes 

 
 
Contents  
[8 Lectures] Characterization of PDEs, Finite difference methods for elliptic, parabolic and 
hyperbolic problems. 
 
[6 Lectures]Stability, consistency and convergence theory, dissipation and dispersion, error 
estimates. 
 
Text books  

1. Quarteroni, A. and Valli, A. , Numerical Approximation of Partial Differential Equations, 
Springer, 1997 

2. Morton, K. W.  and Mayers, D. F. , Numerical solution of partial differential equations, CUP, 
2005 

 
Reference Books  

1. Thomas, J. W. , Numerical partial differential equations: Finite difference methods, Springer, 
1995 

2. Trefethen, L. N. and David Bau III, Numerical Linear Algebra, SIAM, 1997 
 
Online Course Material  

1. Nayak, A. K. , Numerical methods: Finite Difference Approach, NPTEL  Course Material, 
Department of Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107107/ 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  



 
Title Data Analytics Lab Number MAP7XX0 

Department Mathematical L-T-P-D [C] 0–0–2-D [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will  

1. Introduce the basics of R software and then train to write scripts, create a work 
environment, and data handling and data visualization.  

2. Enable students to be able to analyse the data using R. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Understand R language fundamentals and basic syntax. 
2. Comprehend What R is and how it’s used to perform data analysis. 
3. Create their own R code for visualizations of data. 

 
Contents  
Basic calculations with R, Descriptive statistics [3 Labs]: Introduction to R Software, Basics  and 
calculations with Data Vectors, Built-in-commands and Missing Data Handling, Operations with 
Matrices,  Variables and Types of Data,  Absolute, relative frequency and frequency distribution, 
Graphs and plots. 
 
Central tendency of data and Variation in data [4 Labs]:Arithmetic Mean, Median, Quantiles, Mode, 
Geometric Mean and Harmonic Mean, Range, Interquartile Range and Quartile Deviation, Absolute 
Deviation and Absolute Mean Deviation, Mean Squared Error, Variance and Standard Deviation, 
Coefficient of Variation and Boxplots. 
 
Moments, Association of Variables, Fitting of Linear Models [7 Labs]:Central Moments, Absolute 
Moments and Computation of Moments, Skewness and Kurtosis, Univariate and Bivariate Scatter 
Plots, Quantile in 3D plots, Correlation Coefficient, Rank Correlation Coefficient, Measure of 
Association for Discrete and Counting Variables, Least Squares Method. 
 
Text Books  

1. Wickham, H. and Grolemund, G. (2016) R for Data Science: Import, Tidy, Transform, 
Visualize, and Model Data, 'O'Reilly Media, Inc. 

2. Toomey, D. (2014) R for Data Science, Packt Publishing Ltd. 
3. Healy, K. (2018) Data Visualization: A Practical Introduction, Princeton University Press. 

 
Reference Books  

1. Knell, R.J. (2014) Introductory R: A Beginner’s Guide to Data Visualisation,  
2. Stinerock, R. (2018) Statistics with R: A Beginner's Guide, SAGE publication. 

 
Online Course Material  

1. Shalab, Descriptive Statistics with R Software, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics and Statistics, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111104120/ 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(9) Content of Elective courses: 



 
Course Title Dynamical Systems Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 

1. To introduce the concept of linear and nonlinear dynamical systems. 
2. To learn the basic concepts in dynamical systems, like, evolution of system, fixed points, 

periodic points, attractors, bifurcation process and stability of the systems. 
3. To understand the nonlinearity in nature and study of the nonlinear models in engineering 

and its dynamics. 
4. Use Matlab and simulink for solving dissipative dynamical systems, which are relevant for 

engineering models.  
 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Construction of phase portraits of nonlinear system and understanding of fundamental 
difference between linear and nonlinear systems. 

2. Identification of attractors, like, fixed points, periodic attractors, Cantor sets, Chaotic attractor 
and in the continuous case, limits cycles.  

3. Understanding the different bifurcations, like, saddle node, period doubling etc. 
 
Contents  
Linear and Nonlinear Dynamical Systems [Lectures 12]: History of Dynamics, The importance of 
being Nonlinear, A Dynamical view of the world, Examples of dynamical systems, Uncoupled 
Linear systems, Diagonalization, Exponential of operators, Linear systems in R^2 and Stability 
theory, Nonhomogeneous Linear systems, Nonlinear differential equations, Vector field of 
nonlinear systems, Phase portrait, Limit cycles and their stability. 
 
One-dimensional Discrete maps [Lectures 12]: Logistic maps, period doubling bifurcations, Flip 
and tangent bifurcations, Periodic windows, Intermittency transcritical, Lyapunov exponent, 
Universality and Experiments. 
 
Dynamics of Continuous and Discrete Systems: [Lectures 18]: Lorenz equations, Rossler 
Equation, Chua's circuit, Forced pendulum, Stable and Unstable manifolds, Basin boundary, 
Horseshoe maps, Boundary crisis, Interior crisis, Statistics of Chaotic attractor, Frequency 
spectra of orbits, Matrix times circle. 
 

Textbook 
1. Steaven, S., Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos: With Applications to Physics, Biology, 

Chemistry, and Engineering, 1st Ed., Levant Books, 2007 
2. Alligood, K., Sauer, T., and Yorke, J., Chaos:  An Introduction to Dynamical Systems, 

Second Edition, Springer, 2008. 
 

Reference Books 
1. Devaney, R.L., An Introduction to Chaotic Dynamical Systems, Addison Wesley, 2005. 
2. Holmgren, A.R., A First course in discrete dynamical systems, Springer. 

 
Online course Material  

1. Banerjee S., NPTEL Course on Chaos, Fractals and Dynamic Systems, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, IIT Kharagpurhttps://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105054/ 
 

 
 
 
  



 
Title Stochastic Processes Number MAL8XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite Probability and Linear Algebra   

 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 

1.  Provide background in the area of Random Processes. 
2. Provide sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for further 

applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Develop basic understanding of the Stochastic Process, Random Walk and Martingales. 
2.  Impart knowledge in Markov Chain, Birth and Death Process, Brownian Motion, Stochastic 

Calculus 
 
Contents  
[4 Lectures] Conditional probability and conditional expectation, properties of conditional 
expectation. 
 
[8 Lectures]Stochastic processes, stationarity, finite-dimensional distributions, stopping times, 
stopped sigma-fields and processes, right-continuous and canonical filtrations, adapted and 
previsible processes. 
 
[8 Lectures]Random walk; Gaussian distribution: for variables, vectors and processes, non-
degeneracy, stationarity, closeness under 2-mean convergence. 
 
[12 Lectures]Brownian motion, Gaussian construction, independence of increments, scaling and 
time inversion, Levy's martingale characterization, reflection principle, law of its maximum in an 
interval and first hitting time of positive levels, modulus of continuity, quadratic and total variation. 
Related processes: Geometric Brownian motion, Brownian bridge, Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process and 
martingales. 
 
[10 Lectures]Poisson distribution, approximation, rate, construction, independence of increments, 
memoryless property of the Exponential law, the dual process of independent Exponential inter-
arrivals, the order statistics of independent uniform samples. 
 
Textbook  

1. Ross, S. M. (2018), Stochastic Processes, Wiley 
 

Reference Books  
1. Ross, S. M. (2005), Introduction to Probability Models, Elsevier 
2. Shreve, S. E. (2008), Stochastic Calculus for Finance II, Springer 

 

Online course Material  
1. Wu, H., Introduction to Stochastic Processes, Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT 

Open Courseware, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-445-introduction-to-
stochastic-processes-spring-2015/. 

 
 
 
  



 
Title Computational Game Theory Number MAL8XX0 

Department Mathematics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basics of Optimization Theory   
 
Objectives  
1. Provide background in the area of computational game theory. 
2. Provide sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for further 

applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understanding of fundamentals like Nash equilibrium, dominant strategies and their 

applications.  
2. Basic understanding of the Co-operative games, iterated games and mixed strategies. 
3. Knowledge of non-co-operative games, Zermelo’s algorithm and their applications.  
 
Contents  
[12 lectures]: Von Neumann and Morgenstern utility functions, expected utility and expected 
utility maximization, Paradoxes of expected utility maximization, Compact representations for 
preference relations, Dichotomous preferences and goals. Representations for specifying goals,  
Strategic Form Non-Cooperative Games, Basic model and solution concepts, pure strategy Nash 
equilibrium, dominant strategies, notable games, coordination games and focal points, complexity 
of pure strategy Nash equilibrium. 
 
[14 Lectures]: Mixed strategies: Nash’s theorem and Nash equilibrium, Computing mixed strategy 
Nash equilibria, Lemke-Howson algorithm, Zero sum games, Minimax Theorem, Compact 
representations for strategic form games, Boolean games, congestion games, Iterated Games: 
Finitely repeated games and backward induction, Infinitely repeated games, measuring utility over 
infinite plays modelling strategies as finite state machines with output (Moore machines); The Folk 
theorems, Iterated Boolean games, Axelrod’s tournament, the Hawk-Dove game, evolutionary 
game theory, evolutionarily stable strategies. 
 
[16 lectures]: Extensive Form Non-Cooperative Games: Zermelo’s algorithm and backward 
induction, subgame perfect equilibrium, Zermelo’s theorem, Compact representations for 
extensive form games, PEEK games and EXPTIME-completeness results, the Game Description 
Language (GDL), Imperfect information games, PEEK games with incomplete information, 
Cooperative Games: Transferable utility (TU) characteristic function games, basic model, stability 
& fairness solution concepts, cost of stability, Shapley value, Banzhaf index, induced subgraph 
representation, marginal contribution nets, Simple TU games, swap and trade robustness, 
weighted voting games, vector weighted voting games, network flow games, NTU games and their 
representations  
 
Textbooks 
1. G. Chalkiadakis, E. Elkind, and M Wooldridge, Computational Aspects of Cooperative Game 

Theory, Morgan-Claypool, 2011.  
2.  Machler, E. Solan, S. Zamir, Game Theory, Cambridge U.P., 2013.   
3. M. J. Osborne, An Introduction to Game Theory, Oxford U.P., 2004. 
 
Reference Books  
1. R. D. Luce and H. Raiffa, Games and Decisions, Wiley, 1958  
2.  M. J. Osborne and A. Rubinstein, A Course in Game Theory, 1994. 
 
Online course Material  
Not Available 
 
  



 
Title Advanced topics in Computational PDE Number MAL8XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite ODEs, PDEs and numerical methods   
 
Objectives  

The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce multi-grid methods, 
2. Introduce parallel computing methods, 
3. Explain use multi-grid methods and parallel computing methods. 

 
Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability  
1. to solve partial differential equation using multi-grid methods, 
2. to speed up computations using parallel numerical methods. 

 
Contents  
 

Multi-grid methods [20 lectures]: Review of classical finite difference schemes for numerical 
solution of partial differential equations, Fourier analysis for error propogation, influence of grid 
parameters, grid hierarchies, multi-grid cycles, convergence monitors, smoother, W-cycle and 
nested iteration, coarse-grid solver, multigrid as a preconditioner, Numerical implementations 
with Diffpack programming 
 
Parallel Computing [20 lectures]: Need for parallel computation, different hardware 
architectures, message-passing programming model, multicomputer model, OPEN MP, MPI, 
CUDA, parallel linear algebra operations, parallel algorithms for linear systems with special 
structures, parallel implementation of direct and iterative methods for solution of linear 
systems, parallelizing finite difference schemes (wave Equation, heat condunction equation)  
 
 
Textbooks  

1. Langtangen H. P. and Tveito, A. (Editors) (2003) Advanced topics in computational 
partial differential equations: Numerical methods and Diffpack programming, Springer 

2. Briggs, W. L., Henson, V. E., and McCormick, S. F. (2000) A multigrid tutorial, 2nd Ed., 
SIAM 

3. Grama, A., Gupta, A., Karypis, G., and Kumar, V. (2003) Introduction to parallel 
computing, 2nd Ed,  Pearson 

 
Reference Books  

1. Quarteroni, A. and Valli, A. (1997), Numerical approximations of partial differential 
equations, 2nd Edition, Springer 

2. Bertsekas, D. P. and Tsitsiklis, J. N. (1997) Parallel and distributed computation: 
Numerical methods, Prentice-Hall 

  
Online Course Material  

1. M. Ramakrishna, Introduction to computational fluid dynamics, NPTEL course material, 
Department of Aerospace Engineering Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/101106045/ 

2. Subodh Kumar, Parallel Computing,  NPTEL course material, Department of Computer 
Science and Engineering Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106102114/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Title Financial Engineering Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 

1. Securities Pricing Securities, Risk Management Assessment, prediction and decision making, 
under uncertainty, regarding future events and their consequences 

2. Portfolio Optimization Balancing risk and return 
3. Modeling Pricing of derivatives and Itos calculus 

 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Valuation of financial portfolio 
2. Pricing of financial derivatives (options and contracts) 
3. Understanding risk and return 

 

Contents  
 
[18 lectures]Introduction to financial markets and financial instruments, financial derivatives, risk 
and return, risky and risk free assets, interest rates, bonds, bonds pricing, spot and forward rates, 
investment portfolio, mean-variance analysis, capital asset pricing model, arbitrage pricing theory. 
 
[22 lectures]Discrete time models, stock and money market models, principle of no arbitrage, 
pricing of contracts (forward and future), options, put-call parity, option pricing, martingales, 
Binomial model, CRR model, Black-Scholes formula, Greeks, random walk, Brownian motion, 
stochastic process, Itos integral and Ito-Deoblins formula. 
 
Textbook  

1. M. Capinski and T. Zastawniak (2010). Mathematics for finance: an introduction to financial 
engineering, Springer.  

2. S.N. Neftci (2009). Principles of financial engineering. Academic Press/Elsevier. 
 
Reference Books  

1. J.C. Hull (2011). Options, futures and other derivatives. Pearson India. 
2. S.E. Shreve (2000). Stochastic calculus for finance I: The binomial asset pricing model, 

Springer 
 

Online Course Material 
Not Available 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  



Title Reliability Theory Number MAL8XX0 

Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA)  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Probability and Statistics   
 
Objectives  

1. To understand the basic concepts of statistical reliability theory and their various real-life 
applications. 

 
Learning Outcomes  

1. Understand the basic notion of systems, different reliability measures, different notions of 
ageings, different semiparametric models, shock models and dependence structures; 

2. Gain the ability to handle different issues in system reliability. 
 
Contents  
Basic Notion of Systems [6 lectures]: Structure function, coherent systems, k-out-of-n systems, 
dual structures, cut and path sets, modular decomposition. 
 
Reliability Measures [5 lectures]: Survival/Reliability functions, hazard rate function, reversed 
hazard rate function, residual lifetime, inactivity time, mean residual lifetime function, mean 
inactivity time, reliability bounds. 
 
Semiparametric Models [6 lectures]:Common life distributions, scale model, proportional hazard 
rate model, proportional reversed hazard rate model, proportional odds model, proportional mean 
residual lifetime model. 
 
Stochastic Ageings [8 lectures]: Notions of stochastic ageing, different ageing classes, ageing 
properties of common life distributions, closure properties of different ageing classes under 
formation of coherent structures, convolutions and mixtures. 
 
Shock Models and Dependence Structures [7 lectures]: Univariate and bivariate shock models, 
notions of bivariate and multivariate dependence structures. 
 
Issues in System Reliability [10 lectures]: Maintenance and replacement policies, availability of 
repairable systems, optimization of system reliability with redundancy. 
 
Text Books  

1. Barlow, R.E. and Proschan, F. (1975). Statistical Theory of Reliability and Life Testing. Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston, New York. 

2. Lai, C.D. and Xie, M. (2006). Stochastic Ageing and Dependence for Reliability. Springer, 
New York. 

3. Marshall, A.W. and Olkin, I. (2007). Life Distributions. Springer, New York. 
 
Reference Books  

1. Barlow, R.E. and Proschan, F. (1965). Mathematical Theory of Reliability. Wiley, New York. 
2. Samaniego, F.J. (2007). System Signatures and their Applications in Engineering 

Reliability. Springer, New York. 
 
Online Course Material 
Not Available 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  



 
Title Representations of finite groups Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 

1. The goal of this course is to give an introduction to representation theory and to understand 
representations of symmetric groups. 

 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Representation theory and characters of finite groups. 
2. Representation theory of Symmetric groups. 

 
Contents 
Group Action and Modules[6 Lectures]: Groups and Examples (Recall), Group action, Conjugacy 
Classes, Modules: Definition and Examples. 
 
Basic concepts of Representation Theory[10 Lectures]: Representations and basic          examples, 
FG-modules, Group algebra, Irreducible representations, complete reducibility and Maschke’s 
theorem, Schur’s lemma. 
 
Characters and Burnside’s pq Theorem[10 Lectures]: Character theory of representations, 
orthogonality relations, decomposition of the regular representation. Character Tables of some 
groups, Characters and Algebraic Integers, Burnside’s pq-theorem. 
 
Representation theory of symmetric groups[16 Lectures]: Tensor products, Restriction of a 
representation, induced representations, Frobenius reciprocity, Mackey’s irreducibility criterion, 
Representation theory of symmetric groups, Few applications of Representation Theory (if time 
permits). 
 

Text Books 
1. Benjamin Steinberg, Representation Theory of Finite Groups, Springer (Universitext), 

2012. 
2. Gordon James and Martin Liebeck, Representations and Characters of Groups, Cambridge 

University Press, 2001. 
 
Reference Books 

1. William Fulton and Joe Harris, Representation Theory: A First Course, Springer (Graduate 
Texts in Mathematics 129), 1991. 

2. Amritanshu Prasad, Representation Theory: A Combinatorial Viewpoint, Cambridge 
University Press, 2015. 

 
Online Course Material 
Not Available 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  



Title Computational Linguistics Number CSL8XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech./PhD Type Elective  
Prerequisite Basic Probability Theory   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 

1. Enable students to develop computational models for languages. 
2. Introduced linguistic structure of an unfamiliar language in terms of morphology, syntax, 

and orthography. 
3. Impart knowledge of linguistic descriptions of a language combined with some textual 

resource in the language. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Do an exhaustive search of resources in and about a language without many resources. 
2. Resolve technical, logistical, and ethical issues involved in constructing a keyboard layout 

for a language's morphology and orthography. 
3. Design and implement general approaches in rule-based machine translation. 

 
Contents  
 
Introduction[2 Lectures]: Definition of computational linguistics, Ambiguity and uncertainty in 
language, The Turing test. 
Regular Expressions[6 Lectures]: Chomsky hierarchy, regular languages, and their limitations, 
Finite-state automata, Practical regular expressions for finding and counting language phenomena, 
morphology, syntax and orthography. 
String Edit Distance[6 Lectures]: Key algorithmic tool: dynamic programming, optimal alignment of 
sequences, String edit operations, edit distance, spelling correction, and machine translation.  
Context Free Grammar[4 Lectures]: Constituency, CFG definition, use and limitations. Chomsky 
Normal Form, Top-down parsing, bottom-up parsing, Efficient CFG parsing with CYK, Earley parser.  
Language modelling[10 Lectures]: Definition of information and its measurement, noisy channel 
model, the language Shannon game, Entropy, cross-entropy and information gain for language 
phenomena, Probabilistic language modelling and its applications, estimating the probability of a 
word, and smoothing, Generative models of language and their application to building an 
automatically-trained email spam filter, and automatically determining the language. 
Part of Speech Tagging[4 Lectures]: The concept of parts-of-speech, examples and usage, the 
Penn Treebank and Brown Corpus, Collocations and Noun Phrase Parsing. 
Word Sense Disambiguation and Clustering[10 Lectures]: Homonomy, polysemy, different 
meanings, the power of context, Language neighbourhood as a vector, Agglomerative clustering, 
Clustering by expectation maximization, Using clustering to discover different word senses, Semi-
supervised document classification.  
 
Textbook  

1. Grishman, R. (1986) Computational Linguistics: An Introduction, Cambridge University 
Press. 

2. Rosner, M. and Johnson, R. (1992) Computational Linguistics and Formal Semantics, 
Cambridge University Press. 

3. Jurafsky, D. (2000) Speech & Language Processing, Pearson Education India. 
 
Reference Books  

1. Mitkov, R. (2004) The Oxford Handbook of Computational Linguistics, Oxford University 
Press. 

2. Manning, C.D. and Schütze, H. (1999) Foundations of Statistical Natural Language 
Processing, MIT Press. 

 
Online Course Material 
 
  



 
Title Computational Economics Number MAL8XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Optimization techniques   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 

1. Enable students to understand computational economic models. 
2. Impart knowledge to design expressive marketplaces. 

 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Do an exhaustive search of computational economic models. 
2. Analyse expressive marketplaces. 
3. Design and implement optimal market mechanisms. 

 

Contents  
[6 Lectures] Definition of computational economics, basic techniques from mathematics, Linear 
programming, (Mixed) integer linear programming, Computational problems, Algorithms, Runtime 
of algorithms, Easy and hard problems. 
 
[12 Lectures] Single-item auctions, Combinatorial auctions, Bidding languages, Winner 
determination problem, Reverse auctions and exchanges, Expressive financial securities, Barter 
exchanges/matching markets. 
 
[12 Lectures] Kidney exchange, Expressive negotiation over donations, Voting and social choice, 
Iterative mechanisms/preference elicitation.  
 
[12 Lectures] Risk neutrality and risk aversion, Expected utility theory, Incentive compatibility, 
Individual rationality, Revelation principle, Clarke mechanism, Groves mechanisms, Automated 
mechanism design and Proper scoring rules. 
 
Textbook  

1. Miranda, M.J. and Fackler, P.L. (2004) Applied Computational Economics and Finance, MIT 
Press. 

2. Afonso, O. and Vasconcelos, P.B. (2015) Computational Economics: A concise introduction, 
Routledge. 

 
Reference Books  

1. Stokey, N.L. (1989) Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics, Harvard University Press. 
2. Chen, S.-H., Kaboudan, M. and Du, Y.-R. (2018) The Oxford Handbook of Computational 

Economics and Finance, Oxford University Press. 
 
Online Course Material 
 
 
 
 
 
  



Title Computational Chemistry Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 

1. Describe knowledge of modern techniques in computational methods applied in chemistry. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 

1. Use modern computational chemistry techniques to solve fundamental problems related to 
chemistry. 

 
Contents 
Basics: Fundamentals of quantum, classical, and statistical mechanics, mathematical techniques 
(10 lectures) 

Electronic structure: Variation theory, perturbation theory, electron spin, He atom, Pauli exclusion 
principle, Slater determinant (6 lectures)  

Electronic structure of diatomic molecules: Born Oppenheimer approximation, Atomic units, H2+ 
ion, H2 molecule, VB theory, MO theory (8 lectures)  

Wave function based theory: Hartree-Fock theory, Electron correlation, Self-consistent field wave 
function, Moller-Plesset theory, Coupled cluster formulation (10 lectures)  

Basics of Molecular Dynamics: Theoretical foundation, Boltzmann’s relation, harmonic oscillator and 
harmonic baths, Algorithms for equations of motions (7 lectures) 

 
Textbook 
1. Levine, I. N., (2000) Quantum Chemistry, Pearson education. 
2. Lowe, J. P., (1995) Elementary Quantum Chemistry, Academic Press. 

 
Reference Books 
1. Szabo, A. and Ostlund, N. S., (1996) Modern Quantum Chemistry, Dover. 
2. D. Frenkel and B. Smith, (2002), Understanding Molecular Dynamics Simulations,1st Edition, 

Academic Press  
 
Self learning Material 
1. K. Mangala Sunder, Introduction to Chemistry & Quantum Chemical Methods, NPTEL course 

material, Department of Chemistry, IIT Madras, http://nptel.iitm.ac.in
